India-Specific Risk Management
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 2
FPSB Licensed Material
Copyright © 2018-2020 Financial Planning Standards Board. All rights reserved.
This publication may not be duplicated in any way without the express written consent of the 
publisher. The information contained herein is for the personal use of the reader and may 
not be incorporated in any commercial programs, other books, databases, or any kind of 
software or any kind of electronic media including, but not limited to, any type of digital 
storage mechanism without written consent of the publisher or authors. Making copies of this 
material or any portion for any purpose other than your own is a violation of United States 
copyright laws.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 3
Table of Contents
Chapter 1: Overview of the Insurance Sector in India 5
Learning Objectives 5
Topics 5
1-1 Economic, Commercial and Social Aspects of Insurance 7
1-2 Scope of Insurance Business 7
1.2.1 Life Insurance – History and Growth
1.2.2 General Insurance – Historical Perspective and Potential
(Non-Life Insurance, Health Insurance, Re-insurance)
1-3 Laws governing Insurance Business in India 10
1.3.1 The Insurance Act, 1938
1.3.2 The Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015
1.3.3 Law relating to Agency under the Indian Contract Act, 1872
1.3.4 The Consumer Protection Act, 2019
1.3.5 Doctrines of Waiver and Equitable Estoppel
Chapter 2: Regulatory Infrastructure around Insurance 13
Learning Objectives
Topics
2-1 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 14
2.1.1 Duties, Powers and Functions
2.1.2.Licensing and Governance - Insurance Companies, Intermediaries
2.1.3 Apex Insurance Regulator and Industry Watch-Dog
2.1.4 Supervision of Tariff Advisory Committee
2.1.5 Power to Issue Guidelines and Directions
2-2 Insurance Councils and General Insurance Council 16
2.2.1 Constitution and Powers
2.2.2 Self-Regulatory Mechanism
2-3 Insurance Information Bureau of India 16
2-4 Insurance Ombudsman 17
2.4.1 Establishment and Objectives
2.4.2 Appointment, Tenure and Jurisdiction
2.4.3 Rights and Powers
2-5 Insurance Institute of India 19
2.5.1 Authority and Functions
2.5.2 Education and Training
Chapter 3 Insurance Intermediation in India 19
Learning Objectives
Topics
3-1 Categories of Intermediaries, Domains, Functions and Code of Conduct 21
3.1.1 Individual Agents
3.1.2 Corporate Agents, Bancassurance
3.1.3 Insurance Brokers
3.1.4 Web Aggregators
3.1.5 Insurance Marketing Firms
3.1.6 Point of Sales Persons
3-2 Other Specialists in Insurance (other than procurement) 25
3.2.1 Insurance Surveyor or Loss Assessor
3.2.2 Medical Examiners
3.2.3 Third party Administrators (TPA)
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 4
3.2.4 Insurance Repositories (electronic issue of insurance policies)
Chapter 4 Life Insurance 27
Learning Objectives
Topics
4-1 Structure and Organization of Life Insurance Companies in India 30
4-2 Mandate and Responsibilities 30
4-3 Income Sources and Rate-fixing 31
4.3.1 Premium and Types
4.3.2 Factors in Fixation of premium, Rate Making
4-4 Distribution of Benefits 36
4.4.1 Bonus – With Profit or Participating Plans
4.4.2 Simple and compound Reversionary Bonus, Guaranteed Addition
4.4.3 Terminal Bonus, Survival Bonus, Loyalty Addition
4.4.4 Interim Bonus
4-5 Taxation Aspect of Various Life Insurance Policies for Individuals 37
4-6 Loans Eligibility against Life Insurance Policies 38
4-7 Group Insurance Schemes 39
4.7.1 Group Term Insurance Schemes
4.7.2 Employees’ Deposit Linked Insurance (EDLI) Scheme
4.7.3 Group Gratuity Schemes
4-8 Investment Linked Insurance – Unit Linked Insurance Plan (ULIP) 43
4.8.1 Protection, Investment and Income Tax Benefits
4.8.2 Choice of Plans and Switch options – Equity, Debt, Hybrid, etc.
4.8.3 Net Asset Value based redemption, maturity and claim settlement
4-9 Contingency Planning 45
4.9.1 Disability insurance with premium waiver option
4.9.2 Child Plans with premium waiver
4.9.3 Married Women’s Property Act and Insurance Planning 46
4-10 Insurance Policy Document and Legal Implications 47
4-11 Policy Revival Schemes 49
(Ordinary/Special Revival/Foreclosure/Surrender)
4-12 Claims 51
4.12.1 Claims by Maturity
4.12.2 Claims by Death
Chapter 5 General Insurance 54
Learning Objectives
Topics
5-1 Structure of Indian General Insurance Market 55
5-2 Government and Private Insurance Companies 56
5-3 Agents and Brokers 57
5-4 Loss assessors 57
5-5 Classification 58
5.5.1 Non-Life Insurance (Fire, Marine insurance, etc.) 58
5.5.2 Health Insurance 59
5.5.2.1 Taxation Aspect (Individual, Senior Citizens, HUFs, etc.) 
5.5.2.2 Group Health Insurance Policies for Corporates
5.5.3 Agriculture Insurance 63
5.5.4 Credit Insurance 65
5.5.5 Reinsurance (GIC Re) – Mandatory Provisions and Ceding 66
5.5.6 Liability Insurance – Legal Liability Policies 68
5.5.6.1 Public Liability 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 5
The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991
Environmental Impairment Liability (EIL)
5.5.6.2 Product Liability
5.5.6.3 Professional Indemnities
5.5.6.4 Employer’s Liability Insurance
The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923
The Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 (ESI)
Role of Powers of ESIC
The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961
5-6 Motor Insurance 75
5.6.1 The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
5.6.2 The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019
5.6.3 Motor Accidents Claim Tribunals
5.6.4 Types of Losses (Own damage and Third-Party-Liability)
5-7 Policy Document and Legal Implications 78
5.7.1 Proposal Form
5.7.2 Policy Component
Chapter 6: Various Provisions and Perspectives for Policyholders 81
Learning Objectives
Topics
6-1 Provisions insurance when the insurance is taken from multiple companies 82
6.1.1 Life Insurance policies 
6.1.2 General Insurance Policies 
6-2 Provisions related to employer provided group policies – benefits/limitations 83
6.2.1 Group life insurance
6.2.2 Group health insurance
6-3 Provision of life insurance policy surrender – merits/demerits 85
6-4 Comparative evaluation of various life insurance policies 86
6-5 Benefits and limitations in different types of non-life insurance policies 87
6-6 Health insurance and Critical Illness insurance 88
6-7 Health insurance – basic policy and top-up provisions, floater/super floaters 88
6-8 Provisions of Keyman insurance - personal and organizational perspectives 90
6-9 Provisions of Overseas Travel Insurance 90
6-10 Offline versus Online Insurance Policies 91
6-11 Global coverage of insurance policies 91
6.11.1 Life insurance policies
6.11.2 General and other non-life insurance policies
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 6
Chapter 1: Overview of the Insurance 
Sector in India
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
1-1 Explain the insurance sector in India
1-2 Describe the laws governing the insurance business in India
Topics
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 7
1.1 Economic, Commercial and Social Aspect of Insurance
Insurance is a protection and risk management mechanism. A well-built insurance sector 
enhances risk-taking for the Government in the economy, as it provides some safety from 
unanticipated, loss-causing events. Since the funds are available for the long term, investment 
in the long term projects becomes easier leading to rapid infrastructural development. On an 
individual basis, insurance money provides support to the family in the event of loss due to 
death, immobility, work restraints, illness etc. Thus, the insurance industry is of prime 
significance for any country’s economic development. 
The insurance sector in India has gone through a full circle - from being unregulated to 
completely regulated and then being partly deregulated by allowing private companies to 
solicit insurance and also allowing Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) of up to 49% (as of 2019) 
to strengthen the insurance market even further.
For the society as a whole, insurance works as a protection mechanism by mitigating the 
effects of untoward and uncontrollable events such as illness, accident, death, natural 
disasters. It is thus a precondition for the development of the economy. It manages, diversifies 
and absorbs the risks of individuals, and companies, thereby allowing them to recover from 
sudden misfortune. Once the external risks are managed through insurance, productive 
activities such as buying a home and starting or expanding a business are spurred. In turn, 
these activities fuel the demand chain, facilitate supply and also support trade. The aggregate 
impact of all this is level consumption patterns and a wider contribution to financial and social 
stability. 
India is one of the fastest growing economies and as such the insurance market in India is 
poised for strong growth. The insurance industry itself is getting bigger with the country’s 
economy and the insurance companies are increasing their operations in the country. 
The insurance regulator in India (IRDAI) is actively working on diverse areas such as retention 
ratio, claim settlement ratio, protection of interests of policy holders, policyholder grievance 
redressal, consumer financial education and insurance literacy, prevention of unfair business 
practices, spurious calls amongst many others for ensuring orderly growth of insurance 
industry in India. 
1.2 Scope of Insurance Business 
1.2.1 Life Insurance – History and Growth
The history of insurance sector in India has been aptly time-lined by the insurance regulator 
(IRDAI) (Reference www.irdai.gov.in). The same is edited and placed below so as to cover the 
developments over the entire 200 year period correctly. 
The year 1818 saw the advent of life insurance business in India with the establishment of the 
Oriental Life Insurance Company in Calcutta. Further down, the year 1870 saw the enactment 
of the British Insurance Act and in the last three decades of the nineteenth century, the 
Bombay Mutual (1871), Oriental (1874) and Empire of India (1897) were started in the Bombay 
Residency. The Indian Life Assurance Companies Act, 1912 was the first statutory measure 
to regulate life business. In 1928, the Indian Insurance Companies Act was enacted to enable 
the Government to collect information about both life and non-life business transacted in India 
by Indian and foreign insurers. In 1938, with a view to protecting the interest of the insurance 
public, the earlier legislation was consolidated and amended by the Insurance Act, 1938. 
The Insurance Amendment Act of 1950 got rid of Principal Agencies. However, there were a 
large number of insurers and the competition level was high. Unfair trade practices were also 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 8
prevailing. The Government of India, hence, decided to nationalize insurance business. An 
Ordinance was issued on 19th January, 1956 nationalizing the Life Insurance sector and Life 
Insurance Corporation (LIC) came into existence in the same year. Life Insurance Corporation 
absorbed 154 Indian, 16 non-Indian insurers and 75 provident societies. 
The process of re-opening of the insurance sector began in the early 1990s and in 1993 the 
Government set up a committee, under the chairmanship of R.N.Malhotra, to propose 
recommendations for reforms in the insurance sector. The committee suggested that the 
private sector be allowed to enter the insurance industry. Following the recommendations of 
the Malhotra Committee report, the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) 
was constituted as an autonomous body in 1999, and as a statutory body in 2000, to regulate 
and develop the insurance industry. In August 2000, IRDA opened up the market and Foreign 
companies were allowed ownership of up to 26%. 
At the end of March 2019 there are 70 insurers operating in India of which 24 are life insurers, 
27 are general insurers, 7 are stand-alone health insurers and 12 are re-insurers which 
includes foreign reinsurers’ branches and Lloyd’s India. Of the 70 insurers presently in 
operation, eight are in the public sector and sixty-two are in the private sector.
(Reference - IRDAI Annual Report 2018-19, www.irdai.gov.in).
Other stakeholders in the insurance market include the agents (individual and corporate), 
brokers, surveyors and third party administrators (TPAs) servicing the health insurance claims. 
India is ranked 10th among the 88 countries, in life insurance business, for which data is 
published by Swiss Re. During 2018, India’s share in the global life insurance market was 
2.61% and in this year the life insurance premium in India increased by 7.70% (inflation 
adjusted) while global life insurance premium increased by 0.20% (inflation adjusted). In terms 
of premium collected, it was US $ 73.74 billion for India while it was US $ 2820.18 billion for 
the world. During 2018-19, the life insurance industry in India recorded a premium of Rs. 
508,000 crore (a growth of 10.75% from 2017-18) while 286.48 lakh new individual policies 
were issued (a growth of 5.61% from 2017-18). 
(Reference - IRDAI Annual Report 2018-19, www.irdai.gov.in).
Insurance penetration is measured as the percentage of insurance premium to GDP while 
insurance density is the ratio of premium to population. For 2018, in India, the insurance 
penetration stood at US$ 2.74 for life and US$ 0.97 for non-life; while the insurance density 
was US$ 55.00 for life and US$ 19.00 for non-life. (Reference - IRDAI Annual Report 2018-19, 
www.irdai.gov.in).
1.2.2 General Insurance – Historical Perspective and Potential
General Insurance in India started with the Triton Insurance Company Ltd. in 1850 in Calcutta 
by the British. In 1907, the Indian Mercantile Insurance Ltd, was set up as the first company 
to transact all classes of general insurance business. The year 1957 saw the formation of the 
General Insurance Council, which framed a code of conduct for ensuring fair conduct and 
sound business practices.
In 1972, the general insurance business was nationalized with the passing of the General 
Insurance Business (Nationalization) Act. A total of 107 insurers were amalgamated and 
grouped into four companies, namely National Insurance Company Ltd., the New India 
Assurance Company Ltd., the Oriental Insurance Company Ltd and the United India Insurance 
Company Ltd. In 1971, the General Insurance Corporation of India was incorporated as a 
company.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 9
In December, 2000, General Insurance Corporation of India’s (GIC) subsidiaries were 
restructured as independent companies and simultaneously GIC was converted into a national 
re-insurer. In July, 2002, the Parliament passed a bill de-linking the four subsidiaries from GIC.
(edited and reproduced from www.irdai.gov.in)
1.2.2.1 Non – life Insurance
General insurance, or non-life insurance, companies offer various types of insurance 
products in areas of health, motor, personal accident, home, travel insurance products 
etc. With increasing income levels in India , there is an increased demand for vehicles. 
Also, increasing health awareness combined with a growing economy is giving a major 
boost to this sector.
In the year 2018, the general insurance industry in India underwrote a total direct 
premium of Rs. 1.69 lakh crore (a growth of 12.47% from 2017). However, the share 
of Indian non-life insurance premium in global non-life insurance premium was at 1.1% 
and India ranked 15th in global non-life insurance markets. 
The Motor business is the largest non-life insurance segment with a share of 38% and 
a premium collection of Rs. 64,522 crore in 2018-19. The fire and marine are the other 
important areas of the non-life insurance sector. (Reference - IRDAI Annual Report 2018-19, 
www.irdai.gov.in).
1.2.2.2 Health Insurance
Health insurance is one of the emerging sectors in India. The Indian health system is 
one of the largest in the world on account of the sheer size of India’s population. Rising 
cost of healthcare and increasing longevity has created awareness among the citizens 
concerning the importance of health insurance. As a result, the health industry in India 
has rapidly become one of the foremost necessary sectors in terms of income and job 
creation. 
In business terms, the standalone health insurers registered a growth rate of 36.56% 
in the year 2018-19 and the health insurance premium continues to grow over 20% 
year-on-year during the last 4 years. Health insurance in India is classified into 
Government sponsored health insurance, group health insurance and individual health 
insurance. In the year 2018-19, the general and health insurance companies have 
issued around 2.07 crore policies covering a total of 47.20 crore lives.
(Reference - IRDAI Annual Report 2018-19, www.irdai.gov.in).
1.2.2.3 Re-Insurance
After its de-nationalization in the year 2000, the General Insurance Corporation of India 
(GIC Re) has become the only Indian reinsurer. Foreign reinsurers were in operation 
as only servicing offices in India, liaising with Indian marketplace for their parent 
offices. Doors were opened for foreign reinsurers in the year 2016, once the Insurance 
Act was amended. 
At present, GIC Re is the national reinsurer, providing reinsurance to the direct general 
insurance companies in India. The total net premium written by GIC Re during 2018-
19 increased by 3.62% to Rs. 38,996 crore as compared to 2017-18. 
Along with ITI Reinsurance Limited (ITI Re) the reinsurance program was designed to 
meet the objective of optimizing the retention of reinsurance within the country, 
ensuring adequate coverage for exposure, developing adequate capacities within the 
domestic market and providing reinsurance support to direct insurance companies in 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 10
India and foreign insurers/reinsurers. Meanwhile, ITI Re did not commence business 
operations and surrendered their certificate of registration for cancellation.
Section 101A of the Insurance Act, 1938 stipulates that every insurer shall reinsure 
with the Indian reinsurer such percentage of the sum insured on each general 
insurance policy as may be specified by the Authority. With a view to make India a 
Reinsurance hub, the Insurance Law (Amendment) Act, 2015 has allowed foreign 
reinsurers and the Society of Lloyd’s to open their branches in India to transact 
reinsurance business. (Reference - IRDAI Annual Report 2018-19, www.irdai.gov.in).
1.3 Laws governing insurance business in India
1.3.1 The Insurance Act, 1938 
Insurance industry, like any other industry, is governed by a number of Acts. The Insurance 
Act of 1938 was the primary legislation governing all types of insurance to furnish strict state 
jurisdiction over insurance business. This Act has been amended by Insurance (Amendment) 
Act, 2002. It is applicable to all the states of India.
Part I of this Act lays down the definitions such as ‘the insurance company’, ‘insurer’, 
‘insurance agent’, ‘actuary’, ‘intermediaries’ and others related to all aspects of the Insurance 
industry. Part II is the main section of this Act which deals with the provisions applicable to the 
insurers. It spells out the various mandatory requirements for an Insurance Company including 
registration of policies and claims, furnishing reports, provisions regarding investments by the 
insurance company, assignment and transfer of policies, registration of intermediaries 
including agents, insurance business in rural or social sector and various other provisions of 
law for protection of the insured.
Part V of this Act lays down the penalty for default in complying with this Act. It also gives 
power to the Authority (IRDA) to make regulations. (Reference The Insurance Act, 1938 at www.irdai.gov.in).
1.3.2 The Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015
This Act amended three previous Acts related to the insurance sector in India - The Insurance 
Act, 1938, The General Insurance Business (Nationalization) Act, 1972 and The Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999. In order to make the insurance sector more 
practical, the insurance regulator in India (Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
of India - IRDAI) has been given further authority to formulate Rules. 
Under the new Act: 
- Various Sections have been amended, omitted or substituted, while some new 
Sections have been inserted, 
- Provisions related to investments by insurance companies and prohibition for 
investment of funds outside India have been strengthened, 
- The power of investigation and inspection by the Authority has been further increased, 
- Provisions related to assignment and transfer of insurance policies, nomination of 
policy holder, prohibition of payment by way of commission have all been 
strengthened,
- Revised limitation of management expenses in insurance business have been set, 
- New provisions have been inserted related to the appointment and record of insurance 
agents.
As per Section 7A, the cap on Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in Indian insurance companies 
has been raised to 49% providing additional capital flow in the insurance sector. Another 
important amendment was related to mis-statement wherein no policy of life insurance shall 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 11
now be called in question by the insurer on any ground whatsoever after the expiry of three 
years from the policy date. The Act has also allowed foreign reinsurers to do business in Indian 
territory. In order to set up an efficient grievance redressal system, the Securities Appellate 
Tribunal (SAT) has been made the appellate authority to IRDAI’s order.
1.3.3 Law relating to Agency under the Indian Contract Act, 1872
Agency connotes a relationship between two persons/parties wherein one person (the Agent) 
has the power to act on behalf of another (the Principal) to create a legal relationship between 
the two parties. It is important for a financial advisor to understand the laws regarding Agency 
because nearly all business transactions worldwide are meted out through this relationship 
between the Agent and the Principal.
Chapter X of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 deals with laws regarding Agency. Section 182 of 
the Act defines an “agent” as a person employed to do any act for another, or to represent
another in dealings with third persons. The person for whom such an act is done, or who is so 
represented, is known as the “principal”. It also deals with appointment and authority of 
agents/sub-agents, Agent’s duty to Principal and Principal’s duty to Agent amongst other 
important subject matters.
In business law, Agency contracts are quite common. An Agency is created when one person 
delegates his authority to some different person, or appoints him to do some specific tasks in 
their specified areas of work. As such, establishing a Principal-Agent relationship bestows the
rights and duties upon both the parties. Some examples of such a relationship are insurance 
agency, advertising agency, travel agency, brokers, etc. 
(Reference The Indian Contract Act, 1872 at http://uputd.gov.in/site/writereaddata/siteContent/indian-contract-act-1872.pdf)
1.3.4 The Consumer Protection Act, 2019
The Consumer Protection Act, 2019 is enacted to protect the interests of the consumers 
in India. It makes provision for the establishment of authorities for timely and 
effective administration and settlement of consumers' disputes. It applies to all goods and 
services. The 2019 Act repeals the 1986 Act whereby it has substantially enhanced the scope 
of protection afforded to consumers by bringing within its purview advertising claims, 
endorsements and product liability. While it continues to have Dispute Redressal 
Commissions at the District, State and National levels, the monetary value of complaints that 
can be entertained at each of these commissions has been increased substantially.
The jurisdiction of the Consumer Commissions has been expanded to allow complaints to be 
made at the place where the complainant resides or works as opposed to the 1986 Act 
where complaints had to be instituted where the other party resides or conducted business, 
or where the action cause arose. The 2019 Act also introduces the power of judicial review, 
which will allow Consumer Commissions to review their orders.
In contrast to the 1986 Act, appeals from the State Commission to the National 
Commission may now only be made where they involve a major question of law. Similarly, 
appeals from the National Commission to the Supreme Court can only be made against 
complaints which originated in the National Commission. Also, the period prescribed for 
preferring appeals has now been made more stringent. 
The Consumer Protection Act, 2019 is a positive step towards further reformation 
and development of consumer laws in India. 
(Reference http://egazette.nic.in/WriteReadData/2019/210422.pdf, and
https://consumeraffairs.nic.in/acts-and-rules/consumer-protection).
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 12
1.3.5 Doctrines of Waiver and Equitable Estoppel
The legal doctrines of Waiver and Estoppels are directly related to the responsibilities of 
insurance agents. They are important to individuals because they can work to their advantage 
when dealing with an insurance company. Application of these doctrines to the specific 
situation can make the difference between the insurance policy being cancelled or remaining 
in force, or, between claims being denied or being paid. 
Let us understand these two specific terms – Waiver and Estoppel. 
Waiver is the conscious and discretionary giving up of a known legal right. It is a unilateral act 
of one person which results in his surrender of a legal right. The legal right could be 
constitutional, statutory, or a written agreement. The key issue is whether or not the person 
voluntarily gave up his right. 
A waiver can be express or implied. Express waiver could be oral or written. In either case, it 
is a clear statement that a right is being given up. For example, if an insurance company 
notifies a policy holder that it has not lapsed the insured's policy for non-payment of premiums, 
even though it had the right to do so, it has explicitly waived that right.
Implied waivers are created through the conduct of the waiving party that clearly indicates that 
a right will not be enforced. For example, if the insurance company accepts the premium from 
a policyholder after the expiration of the grace period, the company has impliedly waived its 
right to claim that the policy had lapsed.
Estoppel: Cambridge dictionary defines Estoppel as “a legal rule that prevents someone from 
changing their mind about something they have previously said is true in court”. As per 
Investopedia, “estoppel prevents someone from arguing something contrary to a claim made 
or act performed by that person previously.” Often described as a rule of fair play, equitable 
estoppel prevents a person from going back on his words.
From the insurance point of view, an insurer may waive a right, and after the policy holder has 
relied upon the waiver and acted upon it, the insurer will be stopped from claiming the right. 
Assume an individual fails to disclose some information in the insurance proposal form and 
the insurer does not request that information and issues the insurance policy (a waiver). Now, 
in future when a claim arises, the insurer cannot question the contract on the basis of nondisclosure. This is estoppel. 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 13
Chapter 2: Regulatory Infrastructure 
around Insurance
Learning Objectives
2-1 Understand the regulatory infrastructure around insurance
2-2 Explain the authorities which control- various insurance functions
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 14
2.1 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
(IRDAI) Act, 1999
The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) was incorporated as 
an autonomous and statutory body in April 2000, following the recommendations of the 
Malhotra Committee, with a purpose to regulate and develop the insurance industry. It had 
been established by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999.
IRDAI is a 10-member body including the Chairman, five full-time and four part-time Members, 
all appointed by the Government of India. The Insurance Act, 1938, which is the principal Act 
governing the insurance sector in India, provides the powers to IRDAI to frame Regulations 
for supervision of the insurance sector.
IRDAI states its mission as “To Protect the interests of the policyholders, to regulate, promote 
and ensure orderly growth of the insurance industry and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto."
2.1.1 Duties, Powers and Functions
Section 14 of the IRDAI Act, 1999 mentions the duties, powers and functions of IRDAI - which 
includes the following:
- Registering and regulating insurance companies
- Protecting policyholders’ interests
- Licensing and establishing norms for intermediaries of insurance
- Promoting professional organizations in insurance
- Regulating and supervision of premium rates and terms of general insurance covers
- Specifying financial reporting norms of insurance companies
- Regulating investment of policyholders’ funds by insurance companies
- Ensuring the protection of solvency margin by insurers
- Safeguarding insurance coverage in rural and weaker areas of society
2.1.2 Licensing and Governance of Insurance Companies and Intermediaries
One aspect of the Regulator is to ensure that the insurers have in place good governance 
practices with an emphasis on overall risk management and also to ensure financial stability. 
In the year 2009 IRDAI had outlined comprehensive guidelines on Corporate Governance 
practices of the management of insurance functions. On account of the changes brought in by 
the Companies Act, 2013, those guidelines were further revised with effect from 2016 after 
due consultation with the industry representatives and other stakeholders and professionals.
Termed as Corporate Governance Guidelines for Insurers in India - 2016, the objective of 
these guidelines is to ensure that the Board and the management of the insurance company 
recognize the expectations of all stakeholders and those of the Regulator. The company 
should also have the ability to quickly address issues of non-compliance.
These Guidelines address various requirements covering the following elements of Corporate 
Governance in insurance companies:
- Governance structure
- Board of Directors
- Key management functions
- Role of appointed actuaries
- External audit - appointment of statutory auditors
- Disclosures
- Relationships with stakeholders
- Whistle-blower policy
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 15
2.1.3 Apex Insurance Regulator and Industry Watch-Dog
IRDAI is the apex body overseeing the insurance business in India. Every insurance company 
is registered under IRDAI and it sets all rules and regulations on the insurance industry.
IRDAI draws its power from the IRDAI Act, 1999 and the Insurance Act, 1938. As defined in 
Section 14 of the IRDAI Act, the functions, roles and responsibilities of IRDAI are far-reaching. 
The regulator serves as an industry watch-dog for regulating and promoting the insurance 
and reinsurance industries in India.
The role of IRDAI is to protect the interest of the policy holders, to oversee the growth of the 
insurance industry and to help in bringing economic growth. All the insurance companies and 
related associates such as agents, TPAs, brokers, surveyors, repositories etc are expected to 
perform and function under the aegis of the rules framed by IRDAI. There are stiff reporting 
guidelines for the companies and the agents which need to be adhered to.
2.1.4 Supervision of Tariff Advisory Committee (TAC)
Tariff Advisory Committee is a statutory body established by the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 
1968 "to control and regulate the rates, advantages, terms and conditions that may be offered 
by insurers in respect of general insurance business."
The management of the TAC is as per the Insurance Act, 1938 (as amended from time to 
time), the Insurance Regulatory and Development Act, 1999 and the regulations passed by 
IRDAI. The IRDAI Chairman is the TAC Chairman, while a senior officer of IRDAI is nominated 
as Vice- Chairman. There are ten elected members from the Indian market. Under Section 
14(2) of the IRDAI Act, 1999, the duties, powers and functions of TAC are as follows:
- Drawing up and Updating Tariffs
- Clarifying Queries of Insurers
- Ensuring Implementation of the Tariffs
- Collection of Data and Analysis
- Publishing Tariffs and Other Regulations
- Inspection of Risks
The Tariff Advisory Committee's role as a Regulator of products and prices are left unchanged 
by the IRDAI Act, though IRDAI supervises the functioning of TAC. Thus, there are 
complementary but mutually exclusive work areas for both organisations. Decisions taken by 
the TAC within its jurisdiction, subject to observance of prescribed procedures, are final and 
binding on all non-life insurers as well as the insured in India.
2.1.5 Power to Issue Guidelines and Directions
Section 14 of Chapter IV of the IRDAI Act, 1999, gives authority and power to IRDAI to act in 
the best interest of the policy holder. Accordingly, IRDAI shall have the duty to regulate, 
promote and ensure orderly growth of the insurance business and reinsurance business.
Various Sections of the Act give powers to IRDAI such as the Power to Delegate to the 
Chairperson, or any other member, any of its powers and functions. IRDAI may, by a general 
or special order, also form committees of the members and delegate to them the powers and 
functions of the Authority.
IRDAI may also establish a Committee, to be known as the Insurance Advisory Committee, 
and in consultation with the Committee make regulations consistent with the Act and the rules 
made thereunder to bring out the purposes of the Act. However, every rule and every 
regulation made under the Act shall be laid before each House of Parliament while it is in 
session.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 16
2.2 Insurance Councils and General Insurance Council
2.2.1 Constitution and Powers
Life Insurance Council is a forum that provides linkage among all the stakeholders of the 
industry. It evolves and coordinates all discussions and analysis between the government, 
regulatory body and the public. It functions through many sub-committees and includes all life 
insurance companies in India.
The General Insurance Council is again a very important link between IRDAI and the non-life 
insurance industry. The Council not only plays the role envisaged for it by the Insurance Act, 
but it also facilitates the overall growth of the industry for the best interest of all the 
stakeholders.
The Life Insurance Council and the General Insurance Council have been constituted under 
section 64C of the Insurance Act, 1938 in the year 2001. The Insurance Council functions 
through several sub-committees and includes all insurance companies in India.
The mission of Insurance Council is to:
- Function as an effective forum to assist, advise and assist insurers in maintaining 
high standards of conduct and provide services to policyholders
- Interact with the government and various bodies on policy matters
- Actively participate in disseminating insurance awareness in India
- Take steps to develop education and analysis in insurance
(Reference: www.lifeinscouncil.org)
2.2.2 Self- Regulatory Mechanism
The Insurance Councils have been conferred various powers under the Insurance Act, 1938 
and the IRDAI Act, 1999. They interact with the government and other statutory bodies on 
various policy issues and work as an active link between the Indian life insurance industry and 
the global markets.
The Insurance Councils work as a self-regulatory organization. They develop codes of conduct 
for the member companies, compliance programs to observe rules and regulations etc. They 
represent the collective interest of the insurance companies and provide help and guidance to 
members. They are responsible for building a positive image of the insurance industry among 
people. The Councils aid, advise and assist insurers for rendering efficient service to the policy 
holders. They also interact with other organizations of the financial service sector.
The General Insurance Council also has a Code of good Insurance Practices which lists down 
general provisions, application of the law, regulations and guidelines, claims handling and 
grievance redressal amongst other provisions.
(Reference: www.gicouncil.in/regulations/self-regulation)
2.3 Insurance Information Bureau of India (IIB)
Insurance industry is data-driven. It depends on data for all activities including pricing of the 
insurance products. With the growth of the insurance industry, and also opening up of the 
sector to private players, the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) 
required strong and credible information support. However, there was no dedicated agency to 
collect data and consolidate the same into an industry-level pool/repository.
In the year 2009, IRDAI constituted the Insurance Information Bureau of India (IIB) supported 
by an advisory body under the Chairmanship of IRDAI. The Bureau was later registered as an 
independent society in November 2012.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 17
 The Bureau works through its insurance verticals of Life, Health, Motor, Property, Fire, 
Engineering with exclusive support from IT and analytics. The main functional areas of IIB 
includes:
- Act as sole point for the whole insurance industry data
- Ensure data is accessible to numerous market players, researchers, policyholders and 
general public for real time decision making
- Provide benchmark rates for the industry
- Publish reports to help IRDAI in regulatory functions and insurers in decision making
- Publish reports for the advantage of the entire industry
- Provide the mandated inputs for policy analysis and insurance industry development 
activities
- Take initiative for detection of fraud, identification of vehicles not insured, etc.
All the insurance companies submit transaction level data on policies and claims at 
predetermined frequencies. This data covers demographic, policy and product attributes 
which is then used by IIB to generate annual reports, thematic reports and customized reports, 
besides undertaking various research studies. It also provides data to IRDAI for setting the 
premium rates for third party motor insurance.
The Bureau provides a bundle of services associated with motor insurance to various 
stakeholders like public, police, transport departments and insurers through its service 
package titled V-Seva. The services are call centre, SMS and web-based and supply data 
relating to insurance status of the vehicle, stolen vehicles, possession of recovered vehicles, 
accident record etc.
IIB also handles the Central Index Server that acts as a nodal point between any two insurance 
repositories and helps in de-duplication of demat accounts. The Bureau has also built a 
repository of insurance salespersons. Through this, based on key identifiers, the deduplication is expedited to confirm that the applicant is not engaged with any other insurance 
company or insurer intermediary.
(Reference: www.iib.gov.in) 
2.4 Insurance Ombudsman
2.4.1 Establishment and Objectives
The Insurance Ombudsman was created by a Government of India Notification in the year 
1998. The purpose was quick disposal of the grievances of the policy holders in an efficient, 
economical and impartial manner. For a policyholder, the insurance company is the first point 
of contact for any complaint. In case of a non-satisfactory reply or no reply, one can approach 
the Ombudsman.
The Executive Council of Insurers, earlier known as Governing Body of Insurance Council 
(GBIC), has been started under the Insurance Ombudsman Rules, 2017, to set-up and 
facilitate the insurance ombudsman institution in India. It comprises members of the Life 
Insurance Council and General Insurance Council formed under Section 40C of the Insurance 
Act, 1938.
They are empowered to entertain complaints on all aspects of insurances including:
- repudiation of claims by the insurer
- delay in settlement of claims
- dispute in regard to premium paid or payable
- dispute on the legal construction of the policies
- non-issuance of insurance documents to policyholders after receipt of premium
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 18
Presently there are 17 insurance Ombudsman in different cities (Reference www.ecoi.co.in) and any 
person who has a grievance against an insurer can make a complaint in writing to the 
Ombudsman within jurisdiction over the location of the insurance company office. The 
institution of Ombudsman is of great importance for the protection of interests of policyholders 
for building their confidence in the system.
2.4.2 Appointment, Tenure and Jurisdiction
The Executive Council of Insurers issues orders of appointment of the insurance Ombudsman 
on the recommendations of the committee comprising of Chairman of IRDA, Chairman of LIC, 
Chairman of GIC and a representative of the Central Government.
Eligibility: The incumbents for the position of an Ombudsman are drawn from Insurance 
Industry, Civil Services, Administrative Services and Judicial Services within India.
Tenure: An insurance Ombudsman is appointed for a term of three years or till the age of 
seventy, whichever is earlier, and is eligible for re-appointment.
Jurisdiction: The Executive Council of Insurers has appointed seventeen (17) Ombudsman 
across the country allotting them different geographical areas. The Ombudsman can hold 
sitting at different places within their area of jurisdiction in order to expedite clearance of
complaints.
2.4.3 Rights and Powers
Vide Notification dated 25 April 2017, published in Gazette, the Insurance Ombudsman Rules, 
2016 were further revised, and now referred to as the Insurance Ombudsman Rules, 2017. 
Accordingly, various rights and powers have been provided to the Insurance Ombudsman, as 
listed below:
1. The Ombudsman receives and take into account complaints or disputes relating to:
(a) delay in settlement of claim, beyond the time period stated in the regulations;
(b) any repudiation of claims either wholly or part by the insurer;
(c) disputes regarding to paid premiums or payable in case of insurance policy;
(d) misrepresentation of policy terms and conditions at any time within the policy 
document or policy contract;
(e) legal construction of insurance policies;
(f) policy servicing related grievances against insurance companies and their agents 
and intermediaries;
(g) issuance of insurance policy, which is not in conformity with the proposal form 
submitted by the proposer;
(h) non-issuance of insurance policy after the receipt of premium; and
(i) any other matter arising from the violation of provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 
or the rules, circulars, guidelines issued by the IRDAI from time to time.
2. The Ombudsman shall act as counsellor and mediator relating to matters provided 
there is written consent of the parties to the dispute.
3. The Ombudsman shall be prohibited from handling any matter if he is an interested 
party or having conflict of interest.
For policyholders, the insurance ombudsman offices provide hope and the institution has 
helped to generate faith and confidence amongst the consumers.
2.5 Insurance Institute of India (III)
The Insurance Institute of India (III), earlier known as Federation of Insurance Institutes, was 
formed in 1955 in Mumbai, for the purpose of promoting insurance education and training to 
people working or intending to work in the insurance sector. It is a professional institute 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 19
devoted mainly for insurance-related education.
The institute awards Certificates and Diplomas to successful candidates. These are 
recognized by the Indian Government, the IRDAI and various insurance companies in India 
and abroad. Such Certificates and Diplomas are also recognized by similar institutes in various 
countries like UK, Canada and the United States, for grant of exemption from some of their 
papers.
In its role as an apex education and training provider III is associated with all the sectors of 
the insurance industry.
2.5.1 Authority and Functions
The management and control of the Institute, its affairs and business shall be carried on by 
and vested in the Council subject to the provisions of the Memorandum and Regulations of 
the Institute. The Council consists of Members from LIC and GIC and elects amongst 
themselves a President, Deputy President and other executive positions. The President holds 
office for a period of 2 years and the Deputy President and other office bearers shall hold 
office for 1 year.
It shall be the duty of the Council to coordinate and direct the work of the Institute and to 
present a report on the position of the Institute on the affairs and proceedings during the past 
year. The Council has power to make Provisions for carrying out the objects of the Institute 
and for conducting its affairs, make Rules or Bye-laws.
The main functions of Insurance Institute of India are:
- To run college and conduct examinations within the insurance field and related 
subjects for awarding certificates, diplomas and degrees to those interested in 
insurance.
- To prepare and provide reading materials and similar alternative education methods 
for encouraging and helping the study of any subject bearing on any branch of
insurance.
- To form and maintain a library.
- To provide scholarships, grants and prizes for research or any other educational work 
pertaining to insurance.
- To ascertain the law and practice relating to all matters connected with insurance and 
to disseminate such knowledge among those interested in insurance.
- Assist people in the insurance industry to acquire the skills and expertise.
2.5.2 Education and Training
The IRDAI has recognized the Institute as the examining body to conduct pre-recruitment 
examinations for Insurance Agents, Corporate Agents, Web Aggregators, Insurance 
Marketing Firm and Renewal of Insurance Broker exams as well as pre-licensing test for 
Insurance Surveyors and Loss Assessors.
 The Directorate of Postal Life Insurance, New Delhi has licensed the Insurance Institute of 
India to develop the course material for Postal Life Insurance Agents and also recognized 
them as the exam conducting body to organize licensing examination of Postal Life Insurance 
Agents.
(Reference www.insuranceinstituteofindia.com)
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 20
Chapter 3 Insurance Intermediation 
in India
Learning Objectives
3-1 Describe the categories of intermediaries
3-2 Compare other specialists in insurance
3.1 Categories of intermediaries, their respective Domains, Functions and Code of Conduct
3.1.1 Individual Agents
3.1.2 Corporate Agents, Bancassurance
3.1.3 Insurance Brokers
3.1.4 Web Aggregators
3.1.5 Insurance Marketing Firms
3.1.6 Point of Sales Persons
3.2 Other Specialists in Insurance (other than procurement)
3.2.1 Insurance Surveyor or Loss Assessor
3.2.2 Medical Examiners
3.2.3 Third Party Administrators
3.2.4 Insurance Repositories (electronic issue of insurance policies)
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 21
3.1 Categories of Intermediaries, their respective Domains, 
Functions and Code of Conduct
3.1.1 Individual Agents
In the insurance industry, an individual agent is one who has undergone the required training, 
passed an examination and then duly licensed by IRDAI to sell insurance policies and provide 
after-sales service, including claim assistance.
The Insurance Act, 1938 defines an insurance agent as "one who is licensed under Section 
42 of that Act and is paid by way of commission or otherwise, in consideration of his soliciting 
or acquiring business of insurance, including business concerning continuance, renewal or 
revival of policies of insurance."
The license can be issued for life insurance, general insurance or both. In addition, an agent 
can also represent one standalone health insurance company, Agriculture Insurance 
Company of India for selling crop insurance and Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India 
for credit insurance.
Agents serve as representatives of the insurance companies and sell policies on behalf of the 
insurers. The insurer enters into a contractual agreement with the agent that specifies the 
types of products the agent may sell and the commission the insurer will pay for each. While 
some agents are salaried, most agents rely on commissions for income. Some insurers try to 
encourage agents to sell new policies by paying a higher base commission for new policies 
than for renewals. In addition to base commissions, many insurers pay trail commissions.
The role of an agent begins at the stage of sale and continues through the duration of the 
contract. Every agent has to adhere to the code of conduct specified by IRDAI. Some of these 
are:
- Disseminate the requisite information in respect of insurance products offered by his 
insurer;
- Disclose the commission scales, if asked by the prospect;
- Denote the premium to be charged;
- Explain to the prospect the type of information required in the proposal form, and also 
the importance of disclosure of material information;
- Bring to the notification of the insurance company any adverse habits or income 
inconsistency of the prospect, within the form of a report (called “Insurance Agent’s 
Confidential Report”), and any material proven fact that could adversely have an 
effect on the underwriting decision;
- Inform the prospect concerning the acceptance or rejection of the proposal by the 
insurer;
- Obtain the necessary documents while filing the proposal form and other documents 
afterwards asked for.
3.1.2 Corporate Agents, Bancassurance
Every corporate entity (firm/company) may represent an insurance company and sell its 
policies. While involved in a specific business, companies can sell insurance policies to their 
already existing clients. For instance, a travel agent might recommend a travel insurance 
policy or a car dealer might recommend a motor insurance policy. Corporate agent thus 
represents a company or a registered firm for solicitation and procurement of insurance 
business and the insurer allots the agency code to the company/firm.
During the validity of a certificate of registration, a corporate agent can have agreements with 
a maximum of three life insurance companies or three general insurance companies or three 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 22
health insurance companies to solicit and service their insurance products. In addition, they 
can represent Export Credit Guarantee Corporation and Agriculture Insurance Corporation of 
India. The license validity is for three years from its issuance date, and can be renewed for a 
period of three years.
The corporate agents are regulated as per the IRDAI (Registration of Corporate Agents) 
Regulations, 2015. Every corporate agent shall abide by the Code of Conduct as specified in 
Schedule lll of these Regulations, and:
- be answerable for all the acts of omission and commission of its principal officer and 
each specified person;
- ensure that the principal officer and all specified persons are properly trained, skilled 
and knowledgeable in the insurance products they market;
- ensure that the principal officer and therefore the specified person do not make any 
misrepresentation on policy benefits to the prospect;
- ensure that prospect does not purchase an insurance under any compulsion;
- extend all probable help and assistance to an insured in completing all formalities 
and documentation in the event of a claim.
While doing so, every corporate agent will:
- conduct its transactions with clients with utmost good faith and integrity at all times;
- act with carefulness and persistence;
- treat all data given by the potential clients as totally confidential.
Bancassurance
Banks and insurance companies collaborate to make a partnership within which the bank sells 
the insurance firm’s product to its clients. This arrangement of selling an insurance product by 
the insurance company through a bank is known as Bancassurance.
The Bancassurance channel helps to:
- improve the channels through which insurance policies are sold/marketed so as to 
make them reach to the common man
- widen the area of working of the banking sector
- increase in competition and better servicing, better pricing for the customer
This arrangement works well for both the bank and the insurance company, because the bank 
earns a commission amount from the insurance company whereas the insurance company 
widens its market share and customer base.
Being the mixture of the banking and also the insurance sector, bancassurance comes 
beneath the scope of both RBI and IRDAI. As per RBI, any scheduled commercial bank is 
allowed to undertake insurance business as an agent of the insurance company without any 
risk participation. Banks cannot become brokers, as RBI does not allow banks to promote 
separate insurance broking business. As per IRDAI (Licensing of Banks as Insurance Brokers) 
Regulations, 2013 banks can act as corporate agents for solely one life and one non-life 
insurance firm for a commission and no alternative pay except commission.
The current architecture of one-bank-one-insurer helps banks sell the product of their own 
insurer and might lead to conflict of interest in some cases. IRDAI has recently drafted 
guidelines to promote open architecture in bancassurance. In the new model, the banks will 
have to have multiple tie-ups and sell products of multiple insurers.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 23
3.1.3 Insurance Brokers
The concept of Insurance Broker was introduced by IRDAI through IRDAI (Insurance Brokers) 
Regulations, 2002, which were amended in 2013 and 2018. The objective of these 
Regulations is to supervise and monitor the insurance broker as an insurance intermediary.
Insurance brokers provide insurance from all the companies under one roof. Unlike an agent 
who is tied with one company, a broker is not bound by any one company. Brokers can find a 
good deal on insurance for their client because they have a complete understanding of the 
insurance market and they can negotiate premiums with the insurer.
Application to act as an insurance broker can be made for any one of the following 
categories:
(i) direct broker (general) (ii) direct broker (life) (iii) direct broker (life and general both) (iv) 
composite broker (v) reinsurance broker
The Insurance Brokers Regulations define the distinction between them. While a direct broker 
can solicit only insurance business for its client, the reinsurance broker can solicit reinsurance 
business and a composite broker can solicit both insurance and reinsurance business for its 
clients with insurers and/or reinsurers located in India and/or abroad.
The brokers have to invest minimum capital as prescribed by IRDAI and have to comply with 
other requirements like infrastructure, Professional Indemnity cover, payment of license fee 
etc.
The functions of an insurance broker, as prescribed by the Regulations, include the following:
- Rendering advice on appropriate insurance cover,
- Maintaining detailed information of available insurance markets,
- Submitting quotation received from insurer/s to the client,
- Providing underwriting information of the client to the insurer,
- Assisting clients in paying premium, negotiation of the claims, maintaining proper 
records of claims.
The Regulations also prescribe a code of conduct in matters related to sales practices wherein 
every insurance broker shall:
- confirm that he is a member of the Insurance Brokers Association of India (IBAI) or 
any other body of insurance brokers;
- confirm that he does not employ agents to bring in business by canvassing, call 
centers;
- ensure that the client understands the type of service he can offer;
- ensure that the policy proposed is suitable to the needs of the client;
- give guidance only on those matters in which it is conversant
- recommend other specialist for guidance when required;
- not make inaccurate or unfair criticisms of any insurer;
- explain why a policy is proposed and provide comparisons;
- explain when and how the premium is payable.
3.1.4 Web Aggregators
Insurance Web Aggregators compile and supply information regarding insurance policies of 
different companies on a website. Web aggregators are licensed to supply data relating to 
insurance products, comparison of comparable products offered by different insurance 
companies and have linkages to websites of various insurers from where customers will 
choose and get policies on-line. They are governed under IRDAI (Insurance Web Aggregators) 
Regulations, 2017.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 24
The Insurance Web Aggregator has to:
- Exhibit information in their designated website describing the insurer’s products 
- Ensure that the data systems, together with the aggregation website(s)/portals, Lead 
Management System and the Data Centers hosting the website(s)/Portal(s)/Lead 
Management System are in compliance with the data security standards and 
procedures
- Ensure that the leads and other information is transmitted to the insurers and others 
using secured layer data encryption technologies
- Use solely RBI registered payment gateways for assortment and transfer of premium 
to insurers
- Ensure to get the information systems (both hardware and software) audited by 
CERT-In empanelled Information Security Auditing organizations
- Submit a certificate from the statutory auditor every year
For conduct in matters relating to client relationship every web aggregator shall:
- handle all its transactions with clients with utmost good faith and honesty
- act with care and diligence
- ensure that the customer understands his relationship with the Web Aggregator and 
on whose behalf the Web Aggregator is acting
- consider all the information supplied by the prospective customers as totally 
confidential
- avoid conflict of interest
Every web aggregator is also expected to follow guidelines in relation to complaint handling 
wherein he shall have a system of recording and monitoring complaints, ensure that the 
website contains details of complaints handling procedure and ensure that the grievance is 
resolved to the fullest satisfaction of the customer in a reasonable time bound manner.
3.1.5 Insurance Marketing Firms
Insurance Marketing Firms are a distribution channel meant to solicit insurance products and 
to distribute other financial products by employing individuals licensed to market, distribute 
and service such financial products. They are regulated under the Insurance Act, 1938, the 
IRDAI Act, 1999, the IRDAI (Registration of Insurance Marketing Firm) Regulations, 2015 and 
various Regulations, Circulars, Guidelines and instructions issued thereunder.
The registration which is issued under these Regulations is valid for three years. The 
Insurance Marketing Firms can undertake the insurance servicing activities of only those 
insurers with whom they have an agreement.
Such firms engage Insurance Sales Person (ISP) for the purpose of soliciting and procuring 
insurance products of a maximum of two Life insurance companies, two General and Health 
insurance companies at any point of time, along with Export Credit Guarantee Corporation 
Ltd. (ECGC) and Agriculture Insurance Company of India Ltd (AIC). They may engage the 
same person for sale of other financial products also, if that person fulfills the criteria of 
qualification and certification requirements as mentioned in the Regulations.
The other financial products include mutual funds regulated by SEBI, pension products 
regulated by PFRDA, financial products of banks/ banking / NBFC regulated by RBI, noninsurance products offered by Department of Posts, Government of India.
IMFs are allowed to solicit or procure:
- all kind of products sold on individual and retail basis, including crop insurance
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 25
- group personal accident, group health, property, GSLI and term insurance policies for 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME)
Insurance Marketing Firms shall:
- ensure that ISPs are competent, qualified, and have undergone the required training 
and passed the examination as specified by IRDAI
- not divulge any confidential information about its client except where such 
disclosures are required to be made in compliance with any law
- act in the public interest and in fiduciary capacity be accountable for the omissions 
and commissions of their own employees/persons engaged by them
- maintain at all times a professional indemnity insurance cover throughout the validity 
of the period of the registration
3.1.6 Point of Sales Persons (PoSP)
To increase insurance penetration in the country and to facilitate growth in the non-life and 
health insurance business, IRDAI introduced a new distribution model called “Point of Sales 
Person” (PoSP) in the year 2015. Every PoSP can represent an insurance company or an 
insurance intermediary.
PoSP have a lower qualification compared to other insurance distributors such as agents, 
brokers and corporate agents. Accordingly, IRDAI has directed these individuals to sell only 
basic insurance products viz. motor insurance, travel insurance and personal accident 
insurance which do not require a lot of underwriting. These products also do not require much 
discussion with the customer at the time of sale and their benefits are simple to explain. Based 
on the information provided by the customer, the insurance policy is automatically generated 
by the system.
The “Point of Sales Person” is authorized to sell only the following pre-underwritten products:
- Motor Comprehensive Insurance Policy for Two-wheeler, commercial vehicles and 
private cars.
- Third party liability Policy for Two-wheelers, commercial vehicles and private cars.
- Personal Accident Policy
- Travel Insurance Policy
- Home Insurance Policy
3.2 Other Specialists in Insurance (other than procurement)
3.2.1 Insurance Surveyor or Loss Assessor
Regulation 12 of the IRDAI (Insurance Surveyors and Loss Assessors) Regulations, 2015 
mandates appointment of Surveyors and Loss Assessors either by Insured or Insurer to 
assess the loss under an insurance policy in respect of (a) motor insurance (b) other than 
motor insurance. The regulations define the “Surveyor and Loss Assessor” as a person who 
is licensed by the Authority to act as a Surveyor and Loss Assessor. The definition of 
intermediary and insurance intermediary includes insurance surveyors and loss assessors.
Indian Institute of Insurance Surveyors and Loss Assessors (IIISLA) is promoted by IRDAI. 
Every person who is a student of IIISLA, and intending to act as a Surveyor and Loss Assessor 
in respect of general insurance business, can apply to IRDAI for grant of a License. The validity 
of the license is for three years.
As per the Regulations, following are some of the duties and responsibilities of a Surveyor 
and Loss Assessor:
- Maintaining confidentiality without exposing the insurer’s liability and insured’s claim;
- Conducting inspection/survey of the property on behalf of insurer or insured;
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 26
- Investigating and checking reasons of the loss including extent of loss, type of 
ownership and insurable interest;
- Conducting surveys and remark about excess/under insurance;
- Guiding the insurer and the insured on loss minimization, loss control, safety and 
security measures;
- Evaluating liability under the insurance contract;
- Replying to the queries of the insured/insurer in regard to the claim/loss;
- Commenting on salvage and its disposal wherever necessary.
 
Every Surveyor and Loss Assessor have to follow a code of conduct wherein they shall:
- behave ethically and with integrity,
- strive for objectivity in professional judgment,
- act impartially,
- conduct with courtesy and consideration to all people
- not accept or conduct survey works in areas for which he does not hold a license,
- not accept or perform task which he is not competent to accept,
- carry out his professional task with due diligence,
- keep himself informed about all developments pertinent to his professional practice,
- maintain a proper record for the work done by him and comply with all relevant laws.
3.2.2 Medical Examiners
Underwriting is a very important aspect for the insurers at the time of sale of a policy. Any 
misstatement or wilful concealment of material information leads to disputes at the time of 
claim settlement. Health is one of the important parameters for the insurer to decide the 
premium rates. It is utmost important for the insurer to know the factual health condition of the 
person proposing to buy the policy, especially in case of health insurance and life insurance 
(term) plans. 
Insurers engage the facilities of reputed doctors and hospitals for carrying out health checkups of the applicant. A medical test is done which includes a detailed health check-up of the 
applicant. It usually includes two parts:
- A questionnaire where the doctor asks a series of questions. It could be verbal or 
written down.
- Basic sample collections of urine and blood to determine vital medical parameters.
These tests indicate whether any medical conditions and illnesses exist which the insurer 
should be aware of, at the time of sale of the insurance policy; and then provide the most 
suitable cover. However, in India, most times the insurers ask for such medical tests only for 
applicants over a specific age or a high sum assured.
3.2.3 Third Party Administrators (TPAs)
A third-party administrator is a company/agency/organisation, holding a license from IRDAI, 
which provides various operational services as an outsourcing entity of an insurance company. 
Processing of claims is a recurring and standardized activity. Insurance companies, therefore, 
outsource some of their administrative burden to third parties and use the services of TPAs. 
The stakeholders involved are the insurance companies, health care providers and the 
policyholder.
Introduced by the IRDA in 2001, TPAs function as an intermediary between the insurer and 
the insured. The job of a TPA is to maintain databases of all the policyholders, issue them 
identity cards and handle all the post policy issues including claim settlements. As such they 
need a deep knowledge of the rules and regulations of the insurance services.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 27
The TPAs run round the clock toll-free number. TPAs also perform some of the pertinent 
aspects of insurance such as providing ambulance services, medicines and supplies, 
guidance for specialized consultation to policyholders, and providing information about health 
facilities, bed availability, organizing well-being programs. They bring about greater 
efficiency/quality in delivery of services, greater penetration of health insurance, improved 
standardization in procedures and due diligence while minimizing costs/expenditure.
3.2.4 Insurance Repositories
Insurance Repository is a company which is formed and registered under the Companies Act, 
2013 and has been granted a registration certificate by IRDAI for maintaining insurance 
policies data in electronic form on behalf of the insurance companies. This enables policy 
holders to buy and keep insurance policies in an electronic form, rather than paper form. Such 
policies are known as “electronic policies” or “e-Policies”.
A policyholder needs to open an e-Insurance Account (e-IA) with the Insurance Repository to 
buy and keep policies in electronic mode. Once an e IA is opened, the account holder can ask 
for the conversion of all his policies, issued by different insurers, into electronic mode to this 
single account. A person can have just one e-IA with any of the Insurance Repositories.
There are 4 such Insurance repositories as of June 30, 2019:
- NSDL Database Management Limited
- Central Insurance Repository Limited
- Karvy Insurance Repository Limited
- CAMS Repository Services Limited
There are many benefits of holding insurance policies in electronic form including:
- The policies are in safe custody and can be easily accessed when needed.
- All insurance policies (life, pension, health or general) can be electronically held 
under a single e-IA.
- Premium can be paid online for all the policies.
- There is no requirement to visit the offices of individual insurance companies for 
service.
- No need to go through KYC verification again at the time of purchase of new policy.
- All services are available free of charge.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 28
Chapter 4 Life Insurance
Learning Objectives
4-1 Illustrate the structure and organization of life insurance companies in India
4-2 Understand the insurer’s fixing of premium and distribution of benefits
4-3 Illustrate various group insurance schemes
4-4 Understand the features of Insurance Contract and Policy Document
4-5 Distinguish policy revival schemes and claims
4.1 Structure and Organization of Life Insurance Companies in India
4.2 Mandate and Responsibilities
4.3 Income Sources and Rate-fixing
4.3.1 Premium and Types
4.3.2 Factors in Fixation of premium, Rate Making
4.3.2.1 Mortality Tables and Actuarial Valuation
4.3.2.2 Age, Medical Condition and Sum Assured
4.3.3.3 Rate of Guaranteed Benefits
4.3.3.4 Right Premium and Adverse Selection
4.4. Distribution of Benefits
4.4.1 Bonus – With Profit or Participating Plans
4.4.2 Simple and compound Reversionary Bonus, Guaranteed Addition
4.4.3 Terminal Bonus, Survival Bonus, Loyalty Addition
4.4.4 Interim Bonus
4.5 Taxation Aspect of Various Life Insurance Policies for Individuals
4.6 Loans Eligibility Against Life Insurance Policies – With Profit, Endowment and 
investment Plans
4.7 Group Insurance Schemes
4.7.1 Group Term Insurance Schemes
4.7.2 Employees’ Deposit Linked Insurance (EDLI) Scheme
4.7.3 Group Gratuity Schemes
4.7.3.1 Actuarial Valuation; data of retirement, resignation, death, disability
4.7.3.2 Methods to Manage – Create internal resources, Set up a 
Gratuity Fund
4.8 Investment Linked Insurance – Unit Linked Insurance Plan (ULIP)
4.8.1 Protection, Investment and Income Tax Benefits (subject to Lock-in Period)
4.8.2 Choice of Plans – Equity, Debt, Hybrid, Money Market Fund and Switch 
options
4.8.3 Net Asset Value based redemption, maturity and claim settlement
4.9 Contingency Planning
4.9.1 Disability insurance with premium waiver option
4.9.2 Child Plans with premium waiver
4.10 Insurance Policy Document and Legal Implications
4.10.1 Preamble
4.10.2 Operative Clause
4.10.3 Proviso
4.10.4 Schedule
4.10.5 Attestation
4.10.6 Conditions and Privileges
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 29
4.11 Policy Revival Schemes
4.11.1 Ordinary and Special Revival
4.11.2 Instalment Revival
4.11.3 Loan-cum-Revival
4.11.4 Foreclosure of Policy and Reinstatement provisions
4.11.5 Surrender of Policy
4.11.6 Assignment of Policy
4.12 Claims
4.12.1 Claims by Maturity
4.12.1.1 Claims at Periodic Intervals (Money-Back Plans)
4.12.1.2 Claims at Maturity (on surviving the Policy term)
4.12.2 Claims by Death
4.12.2.1 Claimant (Nominee/Assignee) or Legal Representative (Proof 
of Title)
4.12.2.2 Documents Required – Letter of Intimation, Death Certificate (Proof 
of Death)
4.12.2.3 Non-Early Death Claim (Beyond three years) – Presumed to be 
Dead for missing persons, applicability of Indian Evidence Act,1872
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 30
4.1 Structure and Organization of Life Insurance Companies 
in India
Insurance sector is divided into two distinct categories – Life Insurance and Non-Life Insurance 
(also termed as General Insurance). In India, both Life Insurance and General Insurance 
businesses are governed by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
(IRDAI) which is the primary regulator for insurance in India. It was established in 1999 under 
the government legislation called the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
(IRDAI) Act, 1999.
Presently, there are 24 life insurance companies which are operative in India. Life Insurance 
Corporation (LIC) of India is the only public sector company while there are 23 private sector 
life insurance companies. Many of the insurance companies are joint ventures either between 
public or private sector banks and national/international insurance financial corporates. This 
collaboration with the foreign markets has made the insurance sector grow tremendously in 
India.
The life insurance companies in India have traditionally kept an investment perspective to 
insurance, with an idea of providing insurance along with a growth in savings. They have also 
introduced emerging trends like product innovation, multi-distribution and better claims 
management in the Indian market.
The postal department also transacts life insurance business through Postal Life Insurance, 
which is exempt from the purview of the regulator. The government is also striving hard to 
provide insurance to individuals below the poverty line by introducing schemes such as:
- Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY),
- Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) and
- Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY).
Insertion of these schemes have assisted in increasing the insurance reach to the masses. 
All these efforts have led to massive growth within the life insurance sector in the past few 
years. Today in India, life insurance forms a formidable part of the capital market and is second 
only to the banking sector for mobilizing savings. As per the provisional figures published by 
the Life Insurance Council as of 31st December, 2019, the life insurance sector controls:
- More than Rs. 37,455 crore of deployed capital
- Over Rs. 39,62,775 crore of managed assets
- Investments in infrastructure exceeding Rs. 4,15,049 crore
comprising:
- Over 11,295 branches
- More than 22.60 lakh agents
- 2.92 lakh direct employees and growing significantly
- 32.69 crore in-force policies
Other demographic factors like the growing awareness of the need for insurance, growing 
middle class and young insurable crowd will substantially increase the growth of the Insurance 
sector in India.
4.2 Mandate and Responsibilities
The Insurance Act, 1938 is the main Act governing the insurance sector in India. It provides 
the powers to the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) to frame 
regulations for supervision of the insurance industry. IRDAI is a statutory body formed under 
an Act of Parliament. The preamble to the IRDAI Act, 1999, is “to protect the interests of 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 31
holders of insurance policies, to regulate, promote and ensure orderly growth of the Insurance 
industry” for overall supervision and growth of the Insurance sector in India.
IRDAI sets the mandate for the insurance sector to:
- Encourage systematic growth of the insurance industry.
- Protect the interest of the policyholders.
- Promote high standards of integrity within the market.
- Speed up claim settlement.
- Set standards and conduct vigilance.
Section 25 of IRDAI Act, 1999 also lays down the establishment of the Insurance Advisory 
Committee which advises on matters relating to making of regulations for the insurance 
industry. The draft regulations are first placed in the meeting of the Insurance Advisory 
Committee and after incorporating the recommendations they are approved by the IRDAI. 
Every Regulation approved is then notified in the Gazette of India. 
(Reference www.financialservices.gov.in)
The key responsibility of insurers is to assist policyholders in managing risk in an efficient 
way through their insurance products, and to pay the claims covered by such insurance 
products. Insurers, being large institutional investors, help in funding the economic activity of 
the country. They also play an important role in the operation of the economy by encouraging 
people and businesses to make high-value investments.
Some other key responsibilities of the insurance companies are:
- To mobilize savings of the people.
- To extend the sphere of insurance, thereby including the socially and economically 
backward classes.
- To act as trustees of the insured public.
- To safeguard economic use of resources collected from policyholders.
- To manage business in a fiduciary capacity.
4.3 Income Sources and Rate-fixing
Insurance companies mostly generate revenue in three ways:
(a) By charging premiums to the customers for insurance cover, which is their underwriting 
income, (b) Reinvesting such income in low-risk investments, and (c) Unpaid claims on lapsed 
policies. Let us see how.
Underwriting income: Insurance companies fix the premium by calculating the risk on each 
policy. During the year, the company collects huge premiums and may not have to pay claims 
on those policies for many years ahead. The difference between such premiums collected by 
the insurer and the money paid out by way of claims is the underwriting income for the insurer. 
In certain years such income is large on account of few claims paid, while, in other years the 
income could be less due to high claim amount on account of natural calamities etc.
Reinvesting: Insurance companies invest a portion of the collected premiums in low-risk 
investments such as stocks, bonds, and other interest-bearing accounts hopefully earning a 
sizable return.
Lapsed coverage: A policy lapses when people no longer pay the premium and abandon 
their policy. Also, many times the insured survives the policy term (i.e. outlives the term). In 
all such cases while the company has collected all the premiums over the years it has not 
made any pay out thereby generating income for the company.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 32
Since an insurance company is into business, the rate charged should cover expenses and 
losses, and earn some profit. Rate fixing (also called insurance pricing) is the determination 
of what rates, or premiums, to be charged for insurance. It is also the process of establishing 
rates for reinsurance or other risk transfer mechanisms. The rate reflects three major 
elements: the loss cost per unit of risk exposure, the administrative expenses and the profit.
A rate provides for all costs associated with the transfer of risk so that equity among all the 
insured is maintained. Such rates fulfill these four criteria which are usually used by actuaries:
- Rates should be reasonable,
- Rates should not be disproportionate,
- Rates should be adequate, and
- Rates should not be unfairly biased. 
4.3.1 Premium and Types
Each insurance policy is a contract between the individual (the insured) and the insurance 
company (the insurer). If the insured suffers a loss, then, based upon the contract terms, the 
insurer is bound to cover that loss. However, the insured must pay a fee to the insurer, known 
as premium, to enable them to take the risk of such a loss. 
Since premiums are used by the insurer to pay for claims of the insured, the insurer must 
charge an adequate premium, which will cover for losses, administrative costs of running the 
company and eventually result in profit for the company. At the same time, there should not 
be excessive charging of premium by the insurer and they should be justifiable. Also, same 
rates should be charged from all members of an underwriting class with a similar risk profile.
Premiums can be classified as Pure premium and Gross premium. 
The pure premium, determined by actuarial studies, consists of that part of the premium which 
is necessary to pay for losses and loss related expenses. ‘Load’ is in addition to the premium 
which is necessary to cover other expenses, particularly sales expenses, and to allow for a 
profit. 
The gross rate is then the sum of pure premium and the loading per exposure unit. 
Gross Rate = Pure Premium + Load
Thus, gross premium is the premium which is charged from the insurance applicant and is 
calculated as the gross rate (as above) multiplied by the quantity of exposure units to be 
insured. 
Gross Premium = Gross Rate x Quantity of Exposure Units
4.3.2 Factors in Fixation of premium, Rate-making
The process of premium fixation involves various considerations including selling goals, 
competition, legal restrictions and also estimating future costs related to the transfer of risk. 
Such costs include the amount of claims and expenses of their settlement, operational and 
administrative expenses, and the cost of capital. 
Insurers face a problem in setting fair and adequate premiums. Since the premium pays for 
insurance coverage in the immediate future, actual losses and expenses are not known when 
the premium is collected. Only after the premium period has elapsed, will the insurer come to 
know what its true costs are. Larger insurance firms maintain their own databases to estimate 
frequency and also the amount of losses for each and every underwriting category, however 
smaller firms rely on rating bureaus for loss data.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 33
Rate-making (also called rate-fixing, insurance pricing, premium fixation) for life insurance is 
simpler, since there are mortality tables that tabulate the number of deaths for each age, which 
includes a population of many people. Rate-making in life insurance is based on mortality rate, 
interest and expense. Some of the important factors in Rate-Making are:
- Rates should be fair
- Rates should produce a premium adequate to meet total losses but should not bring 
unreasonably large profits.
- Rates should be revised often enough to reflect current costs
Rates charged for life insurance increase with age as people are more likely to die as they get 
older.
4.3.2.1 Mortality Tables and Actuarial Valuation
A mortality table (life table or actuarial table) shows the rate of deaths likely to occur in 
a defined population during a selected time interval. It shows the probability of a 
person's death before his next birthday, based on his current age. Thus, a mortality 
table gives a probability of the number of people who are expected to die per 1,000 
living in any given year. They typically cover from birth of a person through his age 
100, in one-year increments. A most basic mortality table would look like as the one 
given below.
Essentially, mortality tables are long-term mathematical tabulations to measure a 
population's longevity and are usually constructed separately for men and women. 
Since people with different characteristics die at different rates, characteristics such as 
smoking status, occupation, income levels and socio-economic class are also included 
in mortality tables to distinguish different risks.
Mortality tables are a very crucial part of actuarial work. After analysing the data from 
the mortality tables, actuaries perform risk assessments and try to predict the 
probability of claim. Through separate mortality and sickness tables they also try to 
predict the probable losses due to sickness. In mathematical terms, they have to figure 
out the amount of death benefit payable in each future year, and its present value, and 
the probability that the insured person will die in each of those years. From there, the 
premium can be determined. If the probability of a claim is high, the premium amount 
is high for the associated risk. 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 34
4.3.2.2 Age, Medical Condition and Sum Assured
Besides relying on mortality tables, there are several factors that insurance companies 
consider at the stage of underwriting and subsequently price the premium of their life 
insurance policies.
Age: Age is one of the most essential underwriting factors. The possibility of a young 
individual contracting a life threatening disease or dying young is very unlikely. Also, a 
young person will pay more number of premiums compared to someone older. 
Therefore, the premium amount is lower for people buying a life insurance policy at a 
younger age.
Gender: Premium rates are higher for men than for women as statistically men have 
a shorter life expectancy than women and thereby they pose a higher risk of claim. 
Hence, premiums for males is higher than compared to females falling within the same 
criteria. 
Smoking and drinking: For a policyholder, smoking and drinking are injurious to 
health and increase his risk of contracting life threatening diseases. As such, insurance 
companies charge a higher premium for off-setting higher risk from people who smoke 
or drink alcohol.
Current health status: Insurers have the applicant undergo a few medical tests such 
as sugar level, blood pressure, etc to determine the current health state of the 
individual applying for the life insurance policy. If any critical illness or condition is 
revealed in such tests, it will result in higher premiums, or even in rejection of his 
application. On the other side, healthier individuals get the benefit of lowered 
premiums.
Medical History of the family: If a policyholder has a history of serious illnesses from 
a hereditary perspective, it increases his probability of getting it transmitted. Hence, 
the individual’s premium goes up. On the contrary, someone who has had a relatively 
smooth medical history, he stands a greater chance of availing lower premiums for his 
policy.
Death benefit and Policy Term: The larger the amount of death benefit, the higher is 
the premium charged by the insurance company to the policyholder. Likewise, longer 
the policy term, higher will be the premium. This is because the risk of death of the 
policyholder is higher for a policy which covers him for 30 years than a policy which 
covers the same risk for 10 years.
Occupation: People engaged in occupations like shipping, mining, fishing, industrial 
production etc are considered doing a more dangerous job than people working in an 
office where the work environment is relatively safer. As such, premiums charged by 
life insurance companies from policyholders in such occupations are much higher than 
from people engaged in relatively safer jobs or desk jobs.
Every insurance policy is based on each individual person and premiums are 
computed based on the insurer's rules of rating. How these factors affect the premium 
is dependent on the insurer and the way they treat a combination of these and other 
similar factors.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 35
4.3.2.3 Rates of Guaranteed Benefits
Insurance providers offer a “guaranteed benefit” option with the traditional insurance 
plans. In such plans, in lieu of a bonus which varies depending on the profits 
generated, the insurers declare a 'guaranteed addition' (GA) or a 'guaranteed return'. 
A guaranteed benefit on the investment means that the investment amount in the policy 
will grow at the rate of return which is guaranteed. The insured is assured to receive 
such benefits as stated in the benefit illustration of the policy plan. 
Guaranteed benefit plans are designed to cater to the risk-averse investors and offer 
them the benefit of life insurance along with guaranteed payouts at different stages of 
the policy, in addition to the maturity amount. However, the structure of the guaranteed 
plans may vary across insurers. Some offer a guaranteed return based on the premium 
paid, while others on the sum assured of the policy. The amount may also vary based 
on the policy term or the premium paying term. In some plans, the guaranteed returns 
get added to the policy from the second year onwards, while in some, they start at a 
later date.
The plans that come with these options usually charge a higher premium than the nonguaranteed plans. Therefore, the returns, after adjusting for the costs on account of 
the guarantee, are low in such plans. Since these plans come at a higher cost and low 
return they should be chosen by the customers only if they suit their requirements.
4.3.2.4 Right Premium and Adverse Selection
Insurance is a contract between the insurer and the life assured. Premium is the 
consideration which makes the contract valid. Insurers use premiums to cover 
liabilities associated with the policies they underwrite and to keep the revenue model 
viable. As such, it is utmost important for the insurers to charge the right premium 
amount from the policyholders.
Normal insurance premiums are calculated on the basis of policyholders being in 
average good health and a safe work environment. ‘Adverse selection’ in insurance 
refers to insurance firm's acceptance of applicants who are at a greater than normal 
risk, but have concealed information about their actual condition. In such situations, 
the applicant has deliberately hidden material information, which is of critical nature for 
ascertaining his risk profile. The insurer, with less information, is at a disadvantage to 
the applicant in determining the correct premium. As the risk is not factored at the time 
of sale of the policy, this adverse selection leads to faulty determination of premiums 
and loss to the insurance company.
Truth is, the insurance company cannot possibly know the individual factors that 
determine every potential buyers health profile. Therefore, before the sale, the 
company asks all individuals to fill out questionnaires to spell out the material 
information - followed by a very detailed underwriting process. Say, an individual, who 
is a habitual smoker and does not exercise, knowing well that answering truthfully 
means higher insurance premiums, lies and does not declare about his smoking and 
exercise habits. This leads to adverse selection where the insurer is at a disadvantage 
and will charge the normal premium to such an individual of higher risk.
Implications of Adverse Selection
Insurance will not be commercially viable for the company when prospective buyers 
have better information about their risk than the company itself. In such cases of 
adverse selection, people who know that they have a higher risk than the average of 
the group will buy the insurance plan. However, those who have a below-average risk 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 36
may find that the policy is too costly than their perceived value of risk and so may not 
buy.
In such cases, premiums set by the insurer, basis the average risk ascertained by the 
underwriters and the data outlined in the mortality tables, will not be sufficient for the 
insurer to cover the claims that eventually arise. The reason is that there will be more 
wilful buyers of the policy who have above-average risk than those who have belowaverage risk.
4.4 Distribution of Benefits
All the premiums collected from the policyholders get accumulated in the corpus of the 
insurance company. A large part of this is invested by the company in government secured 
debt instruments and a small part is invested in equities. On the basis of earnings from these 
investments, valuation of the assets and liabilities of the insurance company, and the claims 
paid, the insurance company distributes the profits to ‘with-profits’ policyholders. This is
termed a bonus.
Bonuses are declared on an annual basis during the term of the policy. However, the bonus 
may or may not be declared each year as it is dependent on the company's profitability. The 
amount of bonus also differs each year depending on the profits generated by the company.
The insurance companies come up with multiple types of bonuses, which are clearly spelt out 
in the policy brochure. Along with other parameters, at the time of purchase of a policy it is 
also advisable to check the type of bonus which the policy offers.
4.4.1 Bonus - ‘With-Profit’ or Participating Plans
Life insurance companies declare bonus (profit share) on their plans from time to time. 
Insurance plans where the profit is shared with the policyholders is called a ‘with-profit’ plan. 
The customers who take with-profit policies pay a comparatively higher premium which entitles 
them, but not necessarily guarantee, to the share in the profit of the company. The percentage 
of bonus in such plans might vary from one policyholder to another depending on the type of 
the policy, the term and the premium of the policy.
4.4.2 Simple and Compound Reversionary Bonus, Guaranteed Addition
The bonuses, declared regularly and paid at the time of maturity or at the time of policy 
surrender during the policy term or on the death of the life assured, are called reversionary 
bonuses. Once declared, they are included as a part of the guaranteed benefits. The amount 
of bonus is a percentage of the sum assured. They are normally declared annually at the end 
of each financial year.
In a simple reversionary bonus, the bonus which has been accrued in the previous years, does 
not earn cumulative interest and only the principal amount is considered in the interest 
calculation each year. Meanwhile, in a compound reversionary bonus the bonus is computed 
as a percentage on the sum assured and on all preceding accumulated bonuses. Different 
companies follow different approaches to bonus - some might follow the simple approach while 
others may follow the compounding approach.
Similar to bonus, Guaranteed Additions (GAs) are also a form of pay outs. They are calculated 
at a rate per every thousand of the sum assured. They are allowed for each year for which 
premiums are paid under the policy. The GAs are disclosed to the policy holder upfront at the 
time of purchase of the policy. At the time of admittance of a claim, they are added to the basic 
sum assured for making the payment.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 37
4.4.3 Terminal Bonus, Survival Bonus, Loyalty Addition
After declaring the payouts through reversionary bonuses if some residual profits still remain 
available in the policy, they are paid as terminal bonus. It is paid to the policyholder at the time 
of maturity of the policy. It can be said to be a loyalty bonus given to the policyholder for 
continuing the policy till maturity. Since this is not a guaranteed amount, its value is disclosed 
only at the time of maturity of the policy and is totally a discretionary payment from the 
insurance company. Survival bonus is paid at the time of policy maturity wherein the policy 
holder survives the policy term.
Meanwhile, loyalty additions are given to the policy holder to continue paying the premium and 
keep the policy alive. Loyalty additions are given as a percentage of annual premium and vary 
from company to company and policy to policy. They are currently offered on most of the ULIP 
plans and the endowment plans. While some companies pay loyalty addition only at the time 
of policy maturity, others pay them at every 3 or 5 year intervals. The value of loyalty additions 
depends on the premium amount, policy term, premium payment term etc.
4.4.4 Interim Bonus
Insurance companies pay bonus in all cases where a policy matures, or results in a death 
claim, between the two bonus declaration dates. This is often referred to as the interim bonus.
There may be a short period in between the bonus declaration date and the maturity/claim 
date for which the policy has not received bonus, although it has accrued all the declared 
bonuses till the end of the last financial year. In such cases, a bonus is added on a pro-rata 
basis using the interim bonus rates declared by the company. In this way, the insurance 
company ensures that policyholders who happen to claim benefits in the middle of the year, 
on account of death or policy maturity, receive benefit, on a pro-rata basis, for that interim 
period of the year for which the policy was in force.
4.5 Taxation aspects of various Life Insurance Policies
Life insurance is one of the fundamental aspects of a safe and sound financial life not only for 
the individual but also for his or her entire family. No wonders then, by giving ample tax benefits 
the government also encourages people to cover their risks.
There are various provisions on insurance as contained under the prevalent income tax laws 
(Income Tax Act, 1961, as amended each year), wherein tax benefits are allowed on the 
premiums paid and money received from the insurance claims.
Tax treatment for premiums paid: Section 80C of the IT Act provides a widely used benefit 
by way of deduction of taxable income, up to a maximum of Rs. 1.50 lakh, for life insurance 
premiums paid. This deduction is available for life insurance policies, on the life of self, spouse 
or child, though the child could be a major or a minor, married or unmarried, earning or nonearning as well. Financial dependence of the child on the parent is not mandatory for the 
parent to claim tax benefits. Also, there is no restriction on the number of children in respect 
of whom the premiums are paid by the parents to claim this deduction.
One can avail this maximum benefit of Rs. 1.50 lakh on the premium paid towards a pension 
plan also. On maturity, one-third of the maturity amount, withdrawn in the form of cash, is taxfree while monthly pension receipts are treated as income in the hands of the assessee and 
taxed accordingly.
However, the premium paid should be a maximum of 10% of the sum assured for each 
individual year for which the policy continues. For this purpose, sum assured means the 
minimum amount which the insurance company has agreed to pay in the event of death and 
does NOT include any bonus.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 38
In case of a single premium policy, the policy holder is required to keep the life insurance 
policy alive for a minimum of 2 years from the date of commencement. For Unit Linked 
Insurance Plans (ULIPs), premiums have to be paid for 5 years. If these stipulations are 
violated in any year then in such a case the benefit of deduction already taken in the preceding 
years would be deemed as the income of the taxpayer in the year in which the policy is 
terminated.
Tax Treatment of money received: If the policy holder fulfils the criteria of payment of 
premiums, the maturity proceeds from the life insurance policies are tax free under section 
10(10)D. Money received by the family member or the nominee on the death of the policy 
holder, including the bonus, in respect of the life insurance policy is exempt from income tax, 
except that issued as a Keyman insurance policy.
For events other than death, proceeds received from an insurance company in lieu of a life 
insurance policy, issued up to March 31, 2003, will be exempt from income tax. However, for 
policies issued between April 1, 2003 to March 31, 2012 money received from an insurance 
company, other than on death, shall be taxable if the premium exceeds 20% of the sum 
assured in any of the years. For policies issued after April 1, 2012 the same will become 
taxable if the premium exceeded 10% of the sum assured in any year.
According to Section 194DA of the IT Act, TDS is to be deducted on maturity payouts if the 
policy is not exempt under section 10(10) D or if the maturity amount exceeds Rs. 1 lakh in a 
given financial year. The applicable rate of TDS is 1% for all cases where PAN number is 
available and 20% where PAN is not available. The union budget 2019 has proposed to amend 
TDS on insurance policy proceeds to 5%.
4.6 Loans Eligibility Against Life Insurance Policies – With Profit, 
Endowment and investment Plans
A policy holder can take a loan from the insurance company against his life insurance policy. 
Once the premiums have been paid for a few years (usually 2-3 years), the cash value gets 
built up and the policyholder may withdraw a portion of this cash surrender value under the 
policy as a loan. Since the loan is secured there is limited scrutiny by the lender (insurance 
company) - while in other cases, lenders usually evaluate the credit scores. So, the loan 
application process is faster and easier. However, it may take a few years for a life insurance 
policy to accumulate a significant cash value/surrender value. So, the loan amount is limited 
if the loan is taken in the initial years of the policy.
Insurance companies place conditions for disbursing the loan, some of which are:
- A loan cannot be taken against a term plan. It can be availed only against traditional 
life insurance policies viz. endowment plans, money-back plans, whole life etc. where 
there is a guaranteed return and the policy itself is used as a collateral for the loan.
- A three-year waiting period before the insurer allows a loan under the policy. This is to 
check whether the policyholder has been regular in paying premiums or not.
- The loan amount varies between 80% to 90% of the policy surrender value for the 
traditional plans. For ULIPs, the loan amount depends on the corpus value at the time 
of loan application.
- The interest rates are generally lower than those charged on personal loans and are 
specified in the policy document.
- The policy holder has to continue paying the premiums even after availing the loan.
- The policy, against which the loan is taken, is assigned to the insurance company as 
a security till the loan is repaid.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 39
Repayment: The loan amount and the interest needs to be repaid during the term of the 
policy. If only interest is paid, then at the time of settlement, the due principal amount will be 
deducted from the claim amount. If the policy holder dies during the loan term, the pending 
amount will be deducted from the claim amount and disbursed to the nominee.
It is important to pay back the loan on time. Otherwise, the interest will keep adding to the loan 
amount, and may at some point exceed the policy’s cash/surrender value. The policy in such 
a case will lapse, and the policyholder will lose the insurance cover.
Taking a loan against an insurance policy could be advantageous as the policyholder gets a 
chance to unlock the cash value of the policy and use the funds for his financial needs, while 
maintaining his risk cover and without surrendering his policy. Further, since the loan amount 
is not considered as an income, it is not taxable.
4.7 Group Insurance Scheme
Group insurance schemes are used by the Government for social welfare. They offer both life 
and non-life insurance protection under group policies to different groups such as employersemployees, professionals, co-operatives, weaker sections of society, etc. They also provide 
insurance coverage for people in certain approved occupations at the lowest possible premium 
cost.
In group insurance a large number of individuals are covered under a single policy called the 
‘master policy’. The insurance contract is entered into between (a) the body/organization 
which represents the individuals, the employer or the association, and (b) the insurance 
company. The individuals are the beneficiaries of the scheme. The main advantage of such a 
scheme is its low premium and simple insurability conditions. The benefits apply uniformly to 
all the individuals and there is no individual choice of the member.
The sum assured, premium and other terms of insurance cover are negotiated between the 
policyholder and the insurance company and not by the individual beneficiaries. The group 
insurance policy does not have a fixed term; and, the terms and the coverage can 
be negotiated at the time of renewal.
The premium cost for an individual is not risk-based. Rather, it is uniform for all the insured 
people in the group. The premiums are based on age combination of members, their 
occupation and working conditions of the group.
The premium is paid to the insurer by the policyholder, who may or may not collect the same 
from the employees/individuals concerned. Some companies absorb the entire cost of the 
policy as a benefit to its employees. If the premium is collected by the employer it can be by 
way of a deduction from the salary where the contribution may either be the full premium or 
partial premium. Generally, personal statements and medical examination are not necessary 
up to a predetermined sum assured.
A person normally remains covered as long as he continues to work for a certain employer, 
unlike in an individual insurance policy where the insurer often has the right to reject the 
policyholder’s policy renewal, depending on the risk profile.
4.7.1 Group Term Insurance Schemes
Group term insurance plan is a specified life insurance policy that is specially aimed to provide 
coverage to a large group of people under a single policy. Here, the owner of the policy is the 
employer or the organization and the policy provides coverage to all the members of the 
organization or employers.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 40
A group term insurance plan provides some financial security to the dependent families in the 
absence of the employee. Although the employees may have their own individual insurance 
plans, yet a group term insurance policy is beneficial on the whole. Several group insurance 
schemes additionally offer covers for outstanding loans to borrowers, while others offer 
benefits with critical illness and disability. Such a policy does not entitle the employee to any 
proceeds (sum assured) upon surviving the term but provides the payout of lump sum 
proceeds in the event of demise.
4.7.2 Employees’ Deposit Linked Insurance (EDLI) Scheme
Employee Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions (EPF & MP) Act, 1952 provides longterm savings for the salaried workers in the private sector. In 1976, the government introduced 
the Employees Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme (EDLI) to extend the benefits of life 
insurance to the members of EPFO, which later became a part of the EPF Act. Organizations 
having more than 20 employees need to register for EPF. Thus, all employees having an EPF 
account automatically become eligible for the EDLI scheme. This scheme works in conjunction 
with EPF and EPS. 
EDLI applies to all organizations registered under the (EPF & MP) Act, 1952. All such 
organizations have to compulsory subscribe to this scheme and offer benefits of life insurance 
to its employees. An employer can opt for another group insurance scheme, but the benefits 
offered by such a scheme must be equal to or more than those offered under EDLI.
The main objective behind this scheme is to ensure that the family members get some financial 
assistance in the case of death of the member during the period of his service. Family 
members under the EDLI scheme are defined as the spouse, unmarried daughter or a male 
child up to 25 years of age.
In case of death of the active member, during his service period, his nominee or legal heir gets 
a lump sum payment of up to Rs. 6 lakh. The extent of the benefit is decided on the salary 
drawn by the employee in the last 12 months of employment before his death.
The pay-out under EDLI is calculated as under:
{Average Monthly Salary of the Employee for the last 12 months (capped at Rs. 15,000 p.m.) 
x 30} + Bonus Amount (Rs. 1,50,000). Therefore, the maximum payout under EDLI to the 
beneficiary works out to be Rs. 6,00,000. 
In order to claim the insurance benefit, Form 5 IF has to be filled by the nominee after the 
death of the member. The claim form has to be signed and certified by the employer before 
submission.
Salient features of the scheme are:
- There is no prerequisite of separate enrolment by the employee for EDLI, as all 
members of PF are automatically covered under the scheme after becoming a 
member of EPF scheme.
- There is no exclusion for any member from this scheme.
- There is no minimum service required to avail the benefit.
- Individual factors such as age, education, gender etc. of the employee does not 
affect the eligibility criteria for covering under EDLI scheme.
- The members are covered by the EDLI scheme as long as they are an active 
member of the EPF.
- The employer has to make the contribution for EDLI (0.50% of monthly salary upto a 
maximum of Rs. 75 per month) and no fee is deducted from the employee’s salary.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 41
- Effective 15th February 2018, the assured benefit shall not be less than Rs. 2,50,000 
and not more than Rs. 6,00,000.
- The maximum average monthly salary of an employee is capped at Rs. 15,000. If the 
basic salary of a member goes above Rs. 15,000 per month, the maximum benefit is 
capped at Rs. 6,00,000.
- Average monthly salary is calculated as the Basic Salary + Dearness Allowance.
- There are no exclusions to the insurance coverage provided by EDLI. It protects the 
insured person irrespective whether the person is in India or abroad.
- Benefits under EDLI are transferable with any job change, due to which the new 
employer continues to make payment in the existing account.
- The insurance benefits can be availed by the nominees, family members or the legal 
heirs of the member.
4.7.3 Group Gratuity Schemes
Gratuity is a statutory benefit to be paid by the employer to employees as per terms under the 
‘Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972’ in recognition of his services either as a gratuitous payment 
or acknowledgment of the employer satisfaction towards his employee who is leaving after 
rendering long service on his:
- Retirement, or
- Permanent Total Disablement during service, or
- Death during service, or
- Resignation after five continuous years of service.
Every organization, having ten employees during the last financial year, becomes liable to pay 
gratuity to employees who have completed continuous service of five years, which is payable 
at the time of leaving their service. Gratuity is a defined benefit plan calculated by taking into 
account the last drawn salary and the number of years of service of the employee. The 
employer can also structure a gratuity benefit for his employees which is higher than stipulated 
in the Act.
Group Gratuity schemes ensure that the employer has sufficient funds to take care of their 
employees’ future liability of gratuity. The employer can choose to invest a certain amount of 
money in Group Gratuity Plans offered by insurance companies in order to meet this future 
liability. The amount is invested in different equity and debt funds to provide market linked 
returns over a long term. The corpus, thus created, is used by the employer to make claim 
payments for gratuity when employees retire or leave.
The group gratuity schemes come with taxation benefits for the employers. The money 
invested by the employer towards premium in such schemes is considered as a business 
expense. This enables the employer to reduce its taxable business income. Also, the funds 
invested lead to generation of profits and interest income as they multiply.
At the end of each financial year most insurers review the employee data for changes in 
salaries, exits and new appointments. By this, they revalue the liability based on such 
changes.
Group gratuity schemes mandate that the gratuity amount is deposited by the employer in 
such schemes for each respective year; otherwise, accounts of a company are not considered 
true and fair as per Indian Accounting Standards (AS-15), which might lead to future disputes 
for the employer.
4.7.3.1 Actuarial Valuation; data of retirement, resignation, death, disability
The purpose of an actuarial valuation is to calculate the ‘present value’ of payments 
that would be done by the enterprise to its employees in future as part of an employee 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 42
benefit plan. Actuaries start by making the following assumptions about future salary 
increment rates, attrition and mortality rates:
- Discount rate – this is used to convert the future payments of the company 
into a present value. This amount is shown as the liability of the company in 
their financial statements.
- Salary escalation and attrition rates – these are the company’s best 
estimates of future salary increments and attrition.
- Other assumptions include retirement age, disability, mortality, leave 
balance, resignation etc. are important factors for calculation purposes.
The assumptions are then used to project the benefit payments that will be made by 
the company to its employees, as per the rules of the benefit plan.
Chapter IX of the Companies’ Act, 2013, requires that companies get an actuarial 
valuation conducted to estimate the liability and also make other disclosures as 
required by the accounting standard issued by ICAI. One of the accounting standards, 
AS 15, requires an actuarial valuation to be conducted externally by a certified actuary 
at least once a year for employee benefits schemes, including gratuity benefits. 
Auditors or company officials are not able to do these calculations by themselves.
Companies who have been accumulating their liability corpus with an insurer can get 
AS 15 valuation certificates from their insurer, signed by a qualified actuary.
4.7.3.2 Methods to Manage – Create internal resources, Set up a Gratuity Fund
Gratuity is not a part of the salary package but a legal obligation to be borne by the 
company at the time of exit of the employee. In order to manage the present and future 
liabilities of gratuity, companies can follow any of the following two options:
‘Pay as you go’ option where the company makes a provision for gratuity in their 
balance sheet on the accrual basis taking an actuarial report. As and when an 
employee leaves, the company pays gratuity from its resources.
- ‘Funding’ option where the company sets up an approved Gratuity Trust and 
contributes to this Trust. The company can then choose to either self-manage 
the funds of the Trust or else have them managed by an insurance firm. In this 
case, when an employee leaves the services of the company, gratuity will be 
paid from the Gratuity Trust.
Accounting provisions made by the company for gratuity in the Financial 
Statements/Balance Sheet are not allowed as deductions under Section 40A(7) of the 
Income Tax Act, 1961. However, if the company sets up an irrevocable trust, which is 
approved as per Part C of the Fourth schedule to the Income Tax Act, 1961, 
the contributions made by the company in such a trust are allowed as a business 
expense under section 36(1)(v) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
Further, there are three types of tax benefits for the company:
- Annually, an amount equal to 8.33% of basic salaries paid into a gratuity fund 
can be claimed as a tax-deductible expense.
- Contribution equal to 8.33% for each year of past service of an employee paid 
into a gratuity fund is eligible as a tax-deductible expense, when the gratuity 
liabilities are funded for the first time. 
- Interest or investment income earned within the gratuity fund is tax-free.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 43
However, companies need to consider several other factors before deciding whether 
they should fund gratuity liabilities using internal resources or they should set up a 
trust. Some of these are:
- Opportunity cost: For funding gratuity liabilities, companies need to source 
cash from within the business and invest in a gratuity trust thereby denying 
alternative ways that cash could be put to use and the return it would generate.
- Liquidity management: If companies pay off the gratuities to employees as 
and when they leave, the amount paid would vary from year to year depending 
on the number of people leaving, thereby creating a burden on their annual 
cash flows. However, if the gratuity scheme is actuarially funded, the fund will 
build up during the years when no major payouts are paid and then money from 
this fund could be used when large payoffs are required to be paid.
- Cash flow stability: Gratuity payouts increase exponentially as the employees 
age and work longer. If the liabilities are funded, companies can replace the 
increasing gratuity payouts with a stable stream of contributions into the fund.
Finally, the decision of funding the gratuity liability shall depend on how significant the 
above factors are for the organization for meeting their overall business objectives. 
Small and new companies gain from better liquidity and stability while larger companies 
benefit from the tax benefits.
4.8 Investment Linked Insurance – Unit Linked Insurance 
Plan (ULIP)
Investment-linked insurance plans, often referred to as unit-linked insurance plans (ULIPs), 
are life insurance plans which combine protection with investment. A part of the premium paid 
by the policy buyer is utilized to provide him life insurance cover while the remaining part of 
the premium is invested in financial funds, wherein the investor is allotted units. Investmentlinked plans are exposed to investment risk, like other types of investments, which is borne 
entirely by the policy buyer.
Such plans charge different types of fees and charges towards insurance coverage, fund 
management, policy administration, surrender, fund switching etc. All such fees and charges 
are typically deducted through the sale of the units while the rest of the units remain invested 
in the policy.
4.8.1 Protection, Investment and Income Tax Benefits (subject to Lock-in Period)
Based on the financial situation and requirement, ULIPs provide multiple options to the 
investor to choose the amount of life cover and the investment by varying the amount of 
premium. Such plans also provide flexibility to choose the type of funds based on the risk 
profile of the investor.
While the premium of such plans remains constant throughout the life of the policy, the cost 
of insurance cover increases year by year as one gets older. This implies that more units have 
to be sold to pay for the insurance charges, leaving less units for investment under the policy.
In contrast to other participating policies such as a whole life plan or an endowment plan, 
ULIPs do not guarantee cash values. Instead, the fund value of the policy depends on the 
market price of the units held under the policy at the time of redemption/maturity.
Another feature of ULIP is that as the financial needs of the investor change over time he can 
vary his insurance coverage and the investment mix. He may also top-up his investments, 
make withdrawals and switch funds.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 44
ULIPs offer tax benefits both at the time of investment and on maturity of the policy. Premiums 
paid for ULIPs are eligible for tax deduction under Section 80C of the Income Tax Act, 1961 
up to a maximum of Rs. 1,50,000. However, such plans must be kept in force for a period of 
5 years to claim deduction, and the premiums must be paid regularly to avail tax benefits.
Further, under section 10(10D) of the Income Tax Act, if the premium paid on the policy is up 
to 10% of the sum assured during the entire term of the policy, the amount received on maturity 
is exempt from tax.
4.8.2 Choice of Plans – Equity, Debt, Hybrid, Money Market Fund and 
Switch options
Unit linked insurance plans give an opportunity to the policy holder to earn market-linked 
returns. In such plans, part of the premiums is invested in market instruments, including equity 
and debt, in varying proportions to suit the financial requirement and risk appetite of the 
individual. The investments are subject to the risks associated with the capital markets and 
the NAVs of the units may go up or down based on the factors influencing the capital 
market. This investment risk in ULIPs is borne by the policyholder. Some of the asset classes 
in which the funds are invested are:
Equity: A portion of premium is invested in equity funds and stocks of companies. As the 
equity markets are volatile, such investments are considered to be risky; but they tend to offer 
higher reward in terms of growth in money over a period of time. As such, choosing equity is 
a suitable option for those investors who have a higher risk appetite.
Debt: Here a significant portion of the available money is invested in fixed-interest generating 
securities like corporate bonds, government securities, treasury bills, commercial paper and 
other money market instruments. Investing money in such avenues lowers the risk factor for 
the investors. The prime reason for investing in debt instruments is to earn interest income.
Hybrid: Also known as balanced funds, such investments fall in the medium-risk category. 
They vary the amount of investment in fixed components like corporate bonds and varied 
components like stock markets. Such funds are one of the more stable and prudent 
investments.
Money Market: Money market funds are also known as cash funds through which the policy 
holder receives a set amount of returns upon maturity. These funds fall in the lowest-risk 
category.
An investor of a ULIP plan can choose the type of fund he would like to invest in, based on his 
risk appetite and investment goals. Investors seeking lower risk opt for debt funds while those 
seeking higher returns can opt for equity investments. Moreover, ULIP plans allow flexibility to 
switch between funds based on circumstantial changes.
Switch Option: To safeguard a policyholder's return from market volatility, ULIPs offer 
switching the investment plan. Policyholders can move units partially or completely between 
different asset classes like equity, debt and balanced as per their risk appetite and financial 
goals. Some insurance companies allow unlimited switch options, while others have a limit of 
5 to 10 switches in a policy year. However, to generate good returns on investments from the 
switch, the policyholder needs to constantly review and monitor his investments as the market 
conditions change frequently.
4.8.3 Net Asset Value based redemption, maturity and claim settlement
Net Asset Value, or NAV, is the market value of the investments held by the fund after 
deducting liabilities such as management fees, marketing expenses, operating expenses and 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 45
other charges. Thus, NAV of a ULIP plan is the total value of the units’ holdings minus the 
value of its liabilities.
The value of the ULIP plan held by a policyholder is, therefore, the number of units in the 
policy held at any point of time multiplied by the NAV of the fund on that day. This value will 
increase or decrease along with the price of various assets in which the money is invested. 
The updated NAV is posted on the website of the insurer on a daily basis.
Because of this inherent feature of the ULIP plans, the payout value of such plans is not fixed 
but varies on a daily basis. There are three situations under which pay-outs can be received 
from a ULIP plan.
- Upon Policy Surrender: ULIPs have a lock-in period of 5 years. In case the policyholder 
surrenders the policy during the lock-in period, the insurer pays the surrender value 
after deducting all the applicable charges from the fund value. If the policyholder 
surrenders the policy after completion of the lock-in period, but before the maturity of 
the policy, the insurer pays the fund value as calculated by multiplying the NAV (on the 
particular date) by the number of units held.
- Upon Maturity: When the policy period gets over, fund value as derived by multiplying 
the NAV (on the maturity date) by the number of units held is paid to the policyholder.
- Upon Policyholder’s death: If the policyholder of a ULIP plan dies during the policy 
term, the nominee gets the higher of the Sum Assured or the Fund Value as a death 
benefit. So, if the fund value is lower than the sum-assured, then the sum assured will 
be paid. But when the fund's value is more than the sum assured, the death benefit 
paid is the accumulated amount in the fund.
4.9 Contingency Planning
A contingency fund, if in place, can be accessed to manage unexpected outcomes which could 
otherwise lead to temporary financial losses. Such a contingency reserve helps one tide over 
life’s unexpected circumstances that may otherwise drain the available financial resources 
and investments. For example, a sudden job loss can leave one struggling to meet every day 
financial obligations. Having a contingency fund will ensure that he or she does not have to 
worry as funds have already been kept aside anticipating any adverse situation. Thus, it 
becomes important to plan beforehand for unforeseen contingencies. 
Every family’s financial strategy needs to provide for these risks. An emergency fund should 
be the first goal towards which a household should save against the possibility of loss or 
reduction of income. It should be held in liquid assets to enable easy access as and when 
required. If the emergency fund is used up to meet any adverse requirements, then efforts 
must be made to replenish it as soon as possible. The adequacy of the emergency fund should 
also be reviewed periodically.
4.9.1 Disability insurance with premium waiver option
Disability means that one is unable to perform all the material duties in a job. It may be 
temporary (i.e. short term) or permanent.
Opting for disability insurance is one way of contingency planning. It insures one’s earned 
income from the risk of a disability, due to sickness or injury, which might prevent him from 
doing his job. It also covers paid sick leave, short-term and long-term disability benefits. 
People working in organizations where employers do not provide disability insurance benefits, 
or those who are self-employed must purchase such policies towards contingency planning.
The premiums and available benefits under such policies may vary between company to 
company depending on occupation, age, etc. Generally, the premiums are higher for policies 
which provide additional monthly benefits, or offer benefits for longer periods of time, and start 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 46
payments of benefits more quickly following a disability claim. Premiums are also higher for 
policies that state disability in broader terms, meaning thereby the policy would pay benefits 
in a wider range of circumstances.
Some important aspects that must be considered before choosing disability insurance include:
a) waiting period before income starts,
b) the policy covers short and long term disabilities, and
c) whether the policy covers disabilities arising due to accidents or illnesses
Waiver of premium for disability is a provision in the policy that states the insurer will not 
require the insured to pay the premium if they are seriously injured. Insurance companies can 
vary in their definition of a disability, and policies can vary on when and for how long they will 
waive a premium in the event of a disability. Also, insurance companies may charge a higher 
premium to incorporate this waiver within the policy.
4.9.2 Child Plans with premium waiver
Child Insurance Plans are the best way for investing in a child's future. They are a mix of 
investment and insurance to aid in ‘financial planning for a child's’ future needs and 
requirements.
From a very early age of the child, the parent can invest fixed amounts every year which can 
also be timed to mature when the child attains a certain age, say 18 years. Major events in 
the child's life, like marriage or higher studies, can be planned and financed by Child Insurance 
Policies by taking adequate plans at the right time. Such plans can also be purchased as soon 
as the child is born.
They can be market-linked also wherein the fund value is determined by the NAV. Also, the 
premiums paid are exempt from income tax under section 80(C) of the Income Tax Act, 1961. 
The plan benefits are also tax-free in nature under Section 10 (10D) of the said Act.
Key features:
- The premiums payable can be on a lump sum basis i.e. single premium, or paid 
frequently for a selected period of time or on a regular basis. The amount payable will 
depend on the chosen sum assured and the insurer.
- The policy tenure can be for 10 years and above whereby dependent children from 
just born to a maximum of age of 25, with certain exceptions, are covered.
- The maturity amount of a policy can be chosen based on personal requirements.
- Money-back child life insurance plans offer a segmented payout method, which can 
both be in a lump sum or in yearly instalments.
- In ULIPs, the policyholder can withdraw partial amounts to cover financial difficulties.
Waiver of premium: It is an inherent benefit rider of a child education plan. This feature is 
applicable if the policyholder i.e. the parent, dies within a stipulated period of time. In such a 
case, the insurance company waives off all the future premiums until the maturity of the policy. 
This rider enables the policy to continue without any breaks and passes the financial burden 
of the premium to the insurer. This ensures that the maturity benefit which was set for a certain 
age remains intact as planned, in addition to the death benefit paid.
4.9.3 Married Women’s Property Act and Insurance Planning
The proceeds from a life insurance policy may be recovered by one’s creditors if some money 
is due to them. Their rights supersede that of beneficial nominees. To avoid such a situation, 
one can buy the life insurance policy under Section 6 of the MWP Act. It gives special 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 47
protection to the policy holder’s wife and children, and prevents creditors from attaching a life 
insurance policy taken under the MWP Act.
Section 6 of the MWP Act provides that a policy of insurance effected by any married man on 
his own life and expressed to be for the benefit of his wife, or wife and children, or any of them, 
shall ensure and be deemed to be a trust for their benefit and shall not, so long as any object 
of the trust remains, be subject to the control of the husband, or to his creditors, or form part 
of his estate.
Simply put, once the policy is bought under the MWP Act, as long the beneficiaries named in
the policy is alive, no one else will have any right to the benefits, not even the husband’s
parents, husband’s creditors and the husband himself will also have no rights over the survival 
benefits of the policy, if any.
Key points
• The term policy bought under MWP Act is considered as a Trust.
• The beneficiaries (wife and/or children) once mentioned in the policy remain
unchanged throughout the term.
• Only trustees have control on the policy and the receipt of the benefit amount.
• In case of a death claim, the policy proceeds are received by the Trust and can be
claimed only by trustees.
• The Trust holds the claim proceeds for the benefit of the wife and/or children. The 
policy holder cannot take a loan against the policies endorsed under MWP Act.
• In case a cash-value policy is surrendered, the proceeds will go to the beneficiaries.
• If the husband survives the policy term, the maturity proceeds would still be paid to his 
beneficiaries.
4.10 Insurance Policy Document and Legal Implications
Any insurance policy is an integrated contract in the form of an Agreement between the 
insured and the insurer. It is a policy of assurance subject to conditions and privileges of the 
policy document.
A policy document is a standard, formal document which contains all the details of the 
insurance contract, under different sections. It lists the details of the insured (name, date of 
birth, address, contact details etc), the policy schedule, key covers under the policy, including 
the extensions and exclusions. It clearly mentions the free-look period, the benefits under the 
policy plan, rights of the insured, details of the policy cover and suicide exclusion clause 
amongst other general provisions. It also spells out the name of the product, its UIN (unique 
identification number) as listed under IRDAI. If the policy has been sold through the agency 
channel or an insurance agent their details are also mentioned in the policy document.
The insurance contract is legally enforceable and both the parties to the contract are bound 
by the terms and conditions listed in the policy document during the entire term of the policy. 
The policy document is issued by the insurer once the first premium has been paid by the 
insured. Policy document is, in fact, a bible for the insured and the insurer.
4.10.1 Preamble
Preamble in an insurance policy is the declaration by the insurer. It is an introductory 
paragraph in a contract that identifies the type of agreement, the date on which the agreement 
is signed, parties to the agreement, their status (whether they are individuals or entities), and 
their addresses. It can be said to be a preliminary statement at the beginning of a statute, 
stating its purpose and explaining the reason for its enactment.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 48
In other words, the preamble simply says that the insurers will, in return for the premium, pay 
the losses or claims made under the policy. Most policies have a distinct preamble although 
some policies may not. Given below is one such Preamble for reference and understanding.
“WHEREAS the insured ______ , named in the Schedule hereto by a proposal and 
declaration, which shall be the basis of this contract and is deemed to be incorporated herein, 
has applied to the ______ Insurance Company Limited (hereinafter called the Company) for 
the insurance hereinafter contained and has paid the premium as consideration for such 
Insurance in respect of accident or damage occurring during the period of Insurance stated in 
the Schedule or during any subsequent period for which the Insured pays and the Company 
may accept the premium for the renewal of this Policy.”
4.10.2 Operative Clause
Operative Clause: The operative clause of the policy is a promissory clause. It is a promise 
that the insurer undertakes to pay the benefits of the policy to the insured if the reason(s) for 
which the policy was incepted happens while the policy is still in force. It is the single most 
important clause because it defines what is covered by the policy. The operative clause is 
framed as widely as possible. However, by way of an extension the insurer may offer covers 
that are wider than those mentioned in the operative clause. A typical Operative Clause in a 
general insurance policy would read like:
“OPERATIVE CLAUSE: The Company hereby agrees subject to the terms, conditions and 
exclusions herein contained or endorsed or otherwise expressed hereon, to indemnify the 
Insured to the extent of the intrinsic value of the property of the Insured or member(s) of his 
family, so lost, destroyed or damaged, by Fire, Riot and Strike, Theft or Accident, from any 
fortuitous cause, any time during the period of this insurance and within the limits stated in the 
Schedule hereto, provided that the liability of the Company shall in no case exceed in respect 
of each item the sum expressed in the Schedule hereto to be insured thereon or in the whole 
the total sum insured hereby.”
4.10.3 Proviso
Proviso denotes a condition, provision, specification included in an agreement deed, 
mortgage, lease or contract, the implementation or non-implementation of which affects the 
instrument’s validity. It usually begins with the word "…..provided always that... .".
Simply put, it is a clause in a statute or contract upon whose compliance the application or 
validity of a legal document depends. For example, health insurance companies may impose 
provisos for additional insurance if they consider an applicant's health to be an unfavourable 
risk.
4.10.4 Schedule
A schedule of insurance is that part of an insurance contract which sets out the details specific 
to the policy. It is issued by the insurer as part of the policy. It specifies details of the insured’s 
policy containing complete description of properties covered which are in force, the time period 
of cover against the properties explained, the coverage amount, the exclusions, the 
deductibles, and the mode of payment and schedule.
Policy schedule is also known as a schedule of insurance. The purpose of a schedule of 
insurance is to clarify for the insurance company and the insured person precisely what is 
covered. A schedule is not a stand-alone document from the policy wording itself and should 
always be read in conjunction with the policy wording.
A typical schedule in an insurance policy would look like:
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 49
BASE POLICY – (Policy Name) TYPE OF POLICY – Non-Linked and NonParticipating Single Premium Group Term Insurance Plan
OFFICE – POLICY NO:
PROPOSAL NO: DATE OF PROPOSAL: DATE OF COMMENCEMENT OF RISK 
(Effective Date of Coverage): MASTER POLICYHOLDER:
IDENTIFICATION SOURCE & I.D NO.: Details of Insured as at the Effective Date of 
Coverage: As per Register of Members provided by Master Policyholder
ADDRESS (For all communication purposes):
TEL. NO.: MOBILE NO.: EMAIL:
Maturity Date:  Date on which Survival Benefit is payable:
NAME OF THE INSURANCE AGENT/ INSURANCE Intermediary: INSURANCE 
AGENT/ INSURANCE Intermediary LICENSE NO.: INSURANCE AGENT/ 
INSURANCE Intermediary CODE: ADDRESS:
TEL. NO.: MOBILE NO.: EMAIL: Details of Sales Personnel (for direct sales only):
4.10.5 Attestation
Attestation is the act of witnessing the signing of official document and then also signing it to 
verify that it was properly signed by those bound by its contents. Many a times, an attestation 
clause is a provision given in a legal document, normally located after the original signature. 
By signing the attestation clause, the signatories declare and confirm that everything within 
the clause is true and the document's legal requirements have been met.
Mostly, an attestation is a third-party identification of a documented validity of the agreement. 
Attestations are usually related with agreements of great personal and monetary significance, 
especially legal documents.
Insurance companies mandate attestation as a legal acknowledgement of the authenticity of 
a document and a verification that proper processes were followed in order for the 
document to be effective.
4.10.6 Conditions and Privileges
All policy documents list down, under different sections, the terms and conditions of the policy 
to be followed by the policyholder. It also lists their rights and privileges as a customer of the 
policy. The motive is to educate the policy holder on all aspects of the product purchased by 
him.
By doing this, the insurer expects the policy holder to maintain his policy for the entire term in 
a rightful way so that there are no claim denials or the policy does not lapse for lack of 
information. Given below are some of the important sections covered in the life insurance 
policy document:
- Definitions of words and phrases used in the policy document
- Benefits covered under the plan
- Claim process
- Premium payment
- Provisions including suicide exclusion, free look period, fraud and misrepresentation
- Assignment and nomination
- Termination of policy
- Dispute redressal process
- Communication and notices
- Governing laws and jurisdiction
- Details of Ombudsman
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 50
4.11 Policy Revival Schemes
Life insurance policies lapse if the premiums are not paid, even within the allowable grace 
period. Insurers allow automatic revival of a lapsed policy if the outstanding premiums are paid 
along with interest, generally within six months of the first unpaid premium.
Other conditions of revival of a life insurance policy are determined by the insurer on the basis 
of factors such as sum assured, period of lapse, period already run by the policy, age, health 
and occupation of the life assured. So, in cases other than automatic revival on payment of 
arrears of premium and the interest, insurers insist for evidence of continued good health of 
the life assured, which can be accomplished through a self-declaration of good health and/or 
medical report from an authorized medical examiner.
Let us see some variants of revival of lapsed life insurance policies.
4.11.1 Ordinary and Special Revival
Under ordinary revival, the policyholder can easily revive his/her lapsed policy by 
approaching the nearby branch office of the insurer and paying all unpaid premiums along 
with interest. This must be done within 6 months from the lapsation date of the policy. Along 
with the self-declaration of good health, depending on the age of the policy holder, insurers 
also require medical reports.
A policy holder can take advantage of the special revival scheme when he/she is not able to 
repay the outstanding premium. Under this scheme, the initiation date of the policyholder can 
be changed and he/she shall pay a single premium according to the age at the time of revival. 
The insurer can also ask for a declaration of good health and a few medical reports. After 
January 1, 2014 policyholders can revive their non-linked policies within 5 years and unit linked 
policies within 3 years of first unpaid premium.
4.11.2 Instalment Revival
When a policyholder is not able to pay arrears of unpaid premiums in a single amount he can 
choose to pay the outstanding amount in instalments. Depending on the payment mode i.e. 
quarterly or half yearly, the life assured might be needed to pay one half yearly or two quarterly 
premiums. The balance of arrears would then be spread so as to be paid with future premiums. 
The arrears of premiums are calculated in the usual manner as under ordinary schemes. 
Some insurers stipulate that there should not be any loan outstanding under the policy at the 
time of availing such a benefit.
4.11.3 Loan-cum-Revival
This is useful when the insured is not able to pay a lump sum revival amount from his pocket 
at that time. The insured person can revive the policy by taking a policy loan. The loan amount 
is adjusted in premiums. Until the revival date, the amount of loan is calculated as if the policy 
is within a forced condition. The insured will have to pay the additional amount in case there 
is any deficit in the revival amount. If the loan amount is more than the revival amount then 
the extra amount will be paid to the insured.
4.11.4 Foreclosure of Policy and Reinstatement provisions
Foreclosure is an action of closing the policy by the insurer due to default in payment of 
outstanding loan and/or loan interest on the due date. Reinstatement is the process by which 
the insurer puts back into force a policy that has either been terminated because of nonpayment of premiums or has been continued under one of the non-forfeiture provisions.
For reinstatement, the insured will have to submit proof of continued insurability, and will have 
to pay all the due premiums along with the revival charges prescribed at the time of payment. 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 51
If the insurance company deems fit, the insured might have to undergo a medical examination 
as well. After the successful completion of these conditions, the insurance policy shall come 
into force with all its original benefits.
4.11.5 Surrender of Policy
Every policyholder has the option to exit from his life insurance policy before its maturity, 
referred to as ‘surrender of policy’. A regular premium policy can be surrendered after the 
premiums have been paid for 3 years continuously. The policy holder gets an amount 
technically called a ‘Surrender Value’ which is some part of the total accumulated bonus and 
the premiums paid. However, this value differs from one insurance company to another.
Guaranteed surrender value: At the time of purchase, the policyholder is guaranteed a fixed 
percentage of paid premiums depending on the number of years the policy was continued; the 
more the years for which the premiums were paid, the higher will be the surrender value. The 
Guaranteed Surrender Value is the total premiums paid excluding any Extra Premium and 
Rider Premium, multiplied by the applicable Guaranteed Surrender Value factor less any 
survival benefits already paid under the policy.
Special surrender value: In this case, in addition to the paid premiums, the surrender value is 
also a factor of the sum assured, bonuses and policy term. The Special Surrender Value 
factors applicable to the policy may alter from time to time with prior approval of IRDAI. Also, 
no surrender value is available on Rider premiums, if any.
4.11.6 Assignment of Policy
Assignment means transfer of the right, title and interest of the life insurance policy from one 
person to another. The person who transfers his rights is called the assignor and the person 
to whom the policy is transferred is called the assignee.
In India assignment is governed by Section 38 of the Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015 
as amended from time to time. On execution of the assignment the assignee gets all rights 
title and interest in respect of policy assigned and becomes the owner of the policy.
Assignment can be made either on the policy document by an endorsement, or through a 
separate deed of assignment signed by the assignor stating the fact of assignment and duly 
attested. The first assignment can be made only by the policyholder, which becomes operative 
as soon as it is executed. An assignment can neither be cancelled nor can the policy be 
reverted back to the assignor unless the assignee reassigns the policy. A notice of assignment 
is necessary to be submitted with the insurer in writing. The assignee is not entitled to increase 
the death benefit. However, an assignment can be made in favor of more than one person.
Assignments can either be absolute or conditional. In absolute assignment, the assignor 
passes on the full benefits of the policy to the assignee. Once the assignment has been made, 
the policy remains with the assignee and in case of death of the assignee, benefits are passed 
on to his/her legal heirs. The assignor (policyholder) loses his right of benefit under the policy. 
Absolute assignment is commonly seen in commercial situations where the policy is typically 
mortgaged against a debt assumed by the policyholder, like a housing loan.
In conditional assignment, the policy may revert to the assignor on the happening of a certain 
event or events or performance of a promised duty by the assignor. If assignee dies before 
the life assured, the policy would revert to the assignor. The assignor can ensure that he gets 
the benefits of the policy if he survives its tenure, even if the policy has been assigned.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 52
4.12 Claims
A claim is a demand raised by the insured which the insurer should settle as per the promise 
specified in the insurance contract (policy document). A claim gets triggered by the occurrence 
of one or more events covered under the insurance contract.
Insurers have an obligation to settle the claim promptly as it is one of the most important 
services that they can provide to their customers. At the time of settlement of claim, the insurer 
generally checks:
- Whether the insured event has taken place?
- Whether the policy holder has performed his part of obligations with regard to 
payment of premiums, age proof etc.?
- Who are the persons entitled to claim the amount payable under the policy?
The most common types of claims are Maturity Claim and Death Claim as discussed herein.
4.12.1 Claims by Maturity
The amount which is payable on completion of the policy term is called Maturity Claim. It is 
paid only if the policy has completed its due course of time and the policy has been continued 
properly, i.e. all due  premiums have been paid on time. To avail this benefit, the insured has 
to furnish the original policy document and duly filled maturity claim form, also called the policy 
discharge form. Money received from maturity claims is tax free as per the income tax laws.
4.12.1.1 Claims at Periodic Intervals (Money-Back Plans)
For money-back policies the insurance company makes specific payments to the 
policy holder periodically as specified in the terms of the policy. Such payments are 
known as survival benefits. For maturity claims, the insurer pays the sum assured 
less such survival benefits paid during the term of the policy.
4.12.1.2 Claims at Maturity (on surviving the Policy term)
Endowment plans and whole life plans pay the insured a specific amount at the end 
of the policy term, if the insured survives the entire term and has met other criteria of 
the policy. The amount payable is the sum insured plus any accumulated bonuses, 
less any outstanding premiums and interest thereon.
4.12.2 Claims by Death
Life insurance is a contract between an insured (policyholder) and the insurer, whereby the 
insurer promises to pay the designated beneficiary a sum of money upon the death of the 
insured. Such a claim is called a death claim. Depending on the policy terms, other events 
such as terminal illness or critical illness may also trigger payments.
The death claim amount is payable in case of policies where premiums are paid up-to-date or
the death occurs within the grace period. Payment from the policy can be either taken as a 
lump sum or as an annuity, which can be paid in regular installments for either a stated time 
period or for the lifetime of the beneficiary.
4.12.2.1 Claimant (Nominee/Assignee) or Legal Representative (Proof of Title)
A life insurance cover allows the policy holder to specify a nominee to get the benefit 
in case he passes away during the policy term. When a policyholder gets a life 
insurance plan, the beneficiary is an essential part which is named in the policy. 
Nominees are generally legal heirs as most people get life insurance for their family 
members. In case, the nominee is not available or also dies in the process, the legal 
heir becomes the beneficiary.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 53
Thus, a claimant, in the context of insurance, is a policyholder, or the beneficiary, who 
files a formal request to his insurer for payment to cover a specific loss. Claim 
intimation can also be made by relatives of the insured, even if they are not a nominee 
or assignee. The insured’s nominee has to carry out the required procedure to receive 
the insurance claim.
Life insurance claimants or beneficiaries can be many. A business, charitable 
institution or a group of people can also be legal heirs for a particular life insurance 
policy. Often, the nominee for the life insurance policy is awarded to a minor. In case, 
the parent dies during the policy term, the minor does not get the money. The money 
is given to the appointee or legal guardian of the minor child. Benefits for critical illness 
riders or accident and disability riders go to the life insured if he is still alive.
When no nomination has been made in the policy, the claimant is required to attach 
proof that he is legally entitled to make the claim. The insurance company will verify 
the claim and may ask for additional documents for proof of title to stake a claim.
4.12.2.2 Documents Required – Letter of Intimation, Death Certificate
In order to process the claim expeditiously, insurance companies require documentary 
evidence of the covered event - for example death of the insured. Given below are 
some of documents required to be submitted by the beneficiary to the insurer to 
facilitate processing of the claim:
- Letter from beneficiary intimating about the death
- Claim form by the nominee
- Certificate of burial or cremation
- Certificate from the doctor/physician
- Certificate from the hospital
- Employer’s certificate
- Certified court copies of police report like First Information Report (FIR), 
Inquest Report, Post-Mortem Report, Final Report which are required in case 
of death by accident.
- Death certificate issued by municipal authorities etc.
However, insurers may seek additional documents, if required, to process the claim in 
a conclusive manner.  
4.12.2.3 Non-Early Death Claim (Beyond three years) – Presumed to be Dead 
for missing persons, applicability of Indian Evidence Act, 1872
Proof of death is necessary for settling a claim. However, sometimes a person is 
reported missing without any information about his or her whereabouts.
Sections 107 and 108 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 deals with presumption of 
death. Under this Act, if an individual has not been heard for seven years, he or she is 
presumed to be dead. If the nominee, or heirs, claim that the life insured has been 
missing and should be assumed to be dead, insurers require a decree from a 
competent court.
However, the insurer may also act on its own, without a decree of the court, if 
reasonably strong circumstantial evidence exists to show that the life insured could not 
have survived a fatal accident or hazard. It is necessary that the premiums should be 
paid until the court decrees presumption of death; although insurers may, as a 
concession, waive the premiums during the seven years’ period. This is at the option 
of the individual insurer.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 54
Chapter 5 General Insurance
Learning Objectives
5-1 Explain the Indian general insurance market
5-2 Evaluate the various insurance classifications
5-3 Understand public liability, product liability, professional and employer liabilities
5-4 Distinguish the nuances of Motor Vehicles Act with respect to public liability
5-5 Determine the non-life insurance contract, policy document and legal implications
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 55
Introduction
Insurance in India refers to the market for insurance which covers both the public and the 
private sector organizations. It is listed in the Indian Constitution in the Seventh Schedule as 
a Union List subject, implying it can only be enacted by the Central Government.
Section 7(A), Part I of The Insurance Act, 1938 defines “Indian insurance company”:
Any insurer being a company -
- which is formed and registered as per the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
- in which the total holdings of equity shares of a foreign company, either by itself or 
through its subsidiary companies or its nominees, shall not exceed twenty-six percent 
paid-up equity capital of such Indian insurance company;
- whose only purpose is to conduct general insurance business or life insurance 
business or reinsurance business.
5.1 Structure of Indian General Insurance Market (non-life Insurance)
As per The Insurance Act, 1938, "general insurance business" means fire, marine or 
miscellaneous insurance business, whether carried on singly or in combination with one or 
more of them.
General insurance (also called non-life insurance) offers cover for day-to-day living such as 
travel, health, car and bikes, home insurance, accident and marine. It also provides cover for 
industrial equipment, crop insurance, gadget insurance for mobiles, pet insurance etc. There 
are also covers such as Errors and Omissions insurance for professionals, individual and 
business liabilities, credit insurance etc.
In the year 2001, the sector was opened up to the private players and ever since many new 
companies have established their presence in the market. At present, in India, there are public 
sector undertakings which come under the Government and private companies in the general 
insurance market.
As in life insurance, the general insurance industry is also regulated by IRDAI. There are many 
Regulations, Acts and Rules, as amended from time to time, which govern the general 
insurance industry in India. Some of them are:
- Insurance Act, 1938 and Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015
- Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999; IRDAI (Protection of 
Policyholders’ Interests) Regulations, 2017; IRDAI (Insurance Brokers) Regulations, 
2018 and IRDAI (Registration of Insurance Marketing Firm) (First Amendment) 
Regulations, 2016
- Marine Insurance Act, 1963; Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; Public Liability Insurance Act, 
1991; Consumer Protection Act, 1986, etc.
- General Insurance Business (Nationalization) Act, 1972
Other stakeholders in the general insurance market include the insurance 
agents, corporate agents, brokers, web-aggregators, surveyors and Third Party 
Administrators (TPAs) servicing the health insurance claims. There has been a move in the 
channel mix from the previously agency-focused model to further diversified distribution mix.
The general insurance industry has witnessed several changes (regulatory and structural) 
ever since it was opened to the private sector in 2001. The industry has been witnessing trends 
such as increased digital presence and many innovations around customer education and 
service. Insurance companies are involving e-commerce websites, online travel portals and 
online payment companies to make a package and cross-sell insurance. Since November 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 56
2017, IRDAI guidelines have allowed motor vehicle dealers to act as registered insurance 
distributors.
The general insurance industry is being driven by the rising demand in related sectors like the 
automobile industry and the healthcare industry. There is also an increase in the purchasing 
power of the middle-class population, coupled with a growing young and working population.
The Government of India has also taken a number of initiatives to boost the industry such as:
- National Health Protection Scheme as ‘Ayushman Bharat’ to provide coverage of up 
to Rs. 5 lakhs to over 100 million families,
- Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) to benefit marginal farmers
All of this has led to increased penetration, higher coverage, multiple channels and better 
reach and competitiveness in the market. For your clients, this may be an area of increasing 
interest for advice.
5.2 Government and Private Insurance Companies
As per insurance regulator IRDAI (www.irdai.gov.in) the evolution of general insurance 
dates back to the Industrial Revolution in the west and the consequential growth of sea-faring 
trade and business in the 17th century. It came into the country as a legacy of British 
occupation. General Insurance in India has its origin in 1850 in Calcutta by the British in the 
formation of Triton Insurance Company Ltd. In 1907, Indian Mercantile Insurance Ltd. was 
established, being the first company to transact all types of general insurance business. After 
that, in 1957 the General Insurance Council was formed which is a division of the Insurance 
Association of India. The General Insurance Council framed the code of conduct for 
safeguarding fair conduct and rigorous business practices. In the year 1968, the Insurance 
Act, 1938 was revised for regulating investments and setting minimum solvency margins.
Subsequently in 1972, the general insurance industry was nationalized and 107 insurance 
companies were merged into four companies namely The New India Assurance Co. Ltd., The 
National Insurance Co. Ltd., The Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. and The United India Insurance 
Co. Ltd. The General Insurance Company (GIC) was incorporated in 1972 itself and the other 
four companies became its subsidiaries. In the year 2000, GIC became the Indian Reinsurer 
and its regulatory role over its subsidiaries came to an end. Since 2003, GIC's role as a holding 
company of its subsidiaries also ended and the ownership of the subsidiaries was assigned to 
the Government of India.
(Refer www.financialservices.gov.in)
Till 1999, in India private insurance companies were not there. The government then 
introduced the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) Act in the year 1999, 
thereby de-regulating the insurance sector and allowing private companies by setting a limit 
on Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) to 26%, which was later on increased in 2014 to 49% with 
the safeguard of Indian ownership and control.
At present, there are four general insurance companies in the public sector, two specialized 
insurers namely Agriculture Insurance Company Ltd. catering crop insurance and Export 
Credit Guarantee Corporation of India which caters to credit insurance, five private sector 
insurance companies to underwrite policies entirely in Personal Accident, Health and Travel 
insurance sectors and another 27 general insurance companies in the private sector. GIC Re 
now functions as the sole reinsurance company in India.
In the insurance industry, there has been operational and technological changes which have 
led to the growth of various distribution channels. Insurance companies are developing other 
channels to drive growth at lower costs, due to rising commissions in traditional channels like 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 57
agents and banks. This has led to the emergence of additional channels such as call centres, 
mobile, web aggregators and digital direct-to-customer channels. 
5.3 Agents and Brokers
Insurance agents and brokers, both, are vital to the business interest of the insurers as they 
play a key role in distribution and administration of the insurance products.
The agents serve as an intermediary between the insurer and the insured. An insurance 
agent’s responsibility is purely administrative in nature. They are only liable for timely and 
precise processing of forms, paperwork and premiums, say for example in motor insurance. 
They have no duty to conduct a thorough examination of an individual’s business or to ensure 
that appropriate health insurance cover has been provided. Rather, it is the policyholder’s duty 
to ensure that he has purchased the required insurance cover.
On the other hand, brokers function as a super-independent agent. They have a higher duty 
towards the policyholders as they offer a host of insurance products and services to them. 
They analyze a business, interpret the data from various databases and secure correct and 
adequate cover for the insurance business. Brokers normally charge an administrative fee on 
premium payments as they are expected to have additional technical and professional 
expertise as compared to an insurance agent.
The differences between the two can be summed up as below: 
S. No. Agent Broker
1. Insurer's representative Insured's representative
2. Governed by IRDA regulation on Agent Governed by IRDA regulation on 
Brokers
3. Can deal only in products of insurance 
company of which they are agents
Can deal with any insurance 
company
4. Commission is the remuneration Brokerage is the remuneration
5. Professional indemnity is not mandatory Professional indemnity is mandatory
5.4 Loss assessors
A loss assessor is an expert contracted by the individual documenting the claim to ensure that 
it gets processed successfully by the insurer. For ensuring this, the loss assessor takes care 
of all the regulations and processes that are necessary for a guaranteed settlement. A good 
loss assessor works with the customer to document the claim and cater to all the queries and 
requests not only from the side of the customer but also from the side of the insurer, from the 
paperwork to the more practical aspects.
Loss assessors also meet the insurer’s staff members and their selected loss adjusters, for 
discussing the best possible claim settlement for the client. They are excellent negotiators and 
experts on policy terms and conditions. At the same time, they know how to properly quantify 
claims to ensure that the claim is filed for an accurate and realistic amount. They have a 
thorough understanding of how the insurer’s claim department works. A loss assessor could 
be approached for help where the insurer has declined the claim, or where claim settlements 
have been delayed.
It is vital that the claimant enlists the services of a loss assessor as early as possible – ideally 
as soon as one knows that he has to file an insurance claim. This will not only increase the 
chances of making a successful claim, but also free the individual from dealing with their 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 58
insurers. The more the delay, the harder it is for the loss assessors to prepare and present a 
successful claim.
Working of a loss assessor: He would typically start by evaluating the property and checking 
the damage done to it. For example, if a house has been damaged due to fire, the loss 
assessor would evaluate the house, check its monetary value, evaluate the damages done, 
and decide if they are claimable. Once he has collected the evidence and all related 
information, he makes a report of the case and sends it to the insurance company on behalf 
of the claimant. At times, he also negotiates on behalf of the claimant and makes sure that the 
case is properly settled by the insurer.
5.5 Classification
Any type of insurance which is not considered to be life-insurance is known as General 
Insurance. In different countries, general insurance is named differently - yet it covers all 
forms of non-life insurance.
General insurance is categorized as insurance for valuables other than our life – for example: 
house, land, office, cargo, travel, motor, marine etc. which might bring financial loss against 
damage, loss and theft. General insurance covers almost everything related to property, 
vehicle, cash, household goods and also one’s liability towards others.
The broad categories that cover all types of General Insurance are:
- Non-life (Home and Contents, Travel)
- Health,
- Agriculture,
- Credit,
- Reinsurance,
- Liability,
- Motor Vehicle, and
A general insurance policy typically has a period of one year, renewable every year. The 
premium and the cover of such policies depend upon the type and extent of insurance.
5.5.1 Non-Life Insurance
Non-life insurance refers to the insurance of physical goods and properties. It is a means to 
provide financial protection of a building, machinery, equipment, furniture, vehicle etc. against 
the risk of fire, earthquake, accident or theft. Examples of non-life insurance policies include 
home-owners policies, damage cover from fire, marine accidents, travel, theft, automobile 
policies etc.
Our valuable possessions such as home, business, vehicle etc. are exposed to various 
hazards. Traveling also involves risks like risk of accident, risk associated with loss of baggage 
/ passport and medical expenses. Since the probability of occurrence of these risks is very 
difficult to ascertain, it becomes difficult to measure the amount of damage such risks would 
do on their incidence.
Fire insurance: Fire insurance is taken for getting financial compensation against any loss 
caused to property and assets by fire. The insurer promises to pay a defined sum of money to 
the insured in case of loss to property caused by fire, within the policy period. The insured can 
claim the actual value of goods lost by fire or the amount insured, whichever is less I.e. insured 
cannot claim more than the value of the goods lost.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 59
Marine insurance: It is taken to claim compensation against losses due to perils in the sea. 
It is a contract taken to indemnify against damage of goods in sea voyage. The subject matter 
in marine insurance is a ship, cargo or freight.
Motor insurance: It is taken to claim financial compensation for the loss of motor vehicle 
caused by theft, accident etc. We will study about this in detail further ahead.
Difference between life- and non-life insurance
Base of 
difference
Life insurance Non-life insurance
Subject matter Life of a human being Goods or properties
Period of contract Long term contract – 10 years, 
20 years and so on
Short term contract taken normally 
for one year and is renewed 
periodically
Indemnity Not a contract of indemnity 
since value of human life 
cannot be quantified in terms 
of money
Contract of indemnity where loss of 
goods and properties is indemnified 
in terms of money
Compensation Insurer pays predetermined 
sum of money to the insured 
on the maturity of policy or to 
the nominee in case of death 
of the insured
Insurer pays predetermined sum of 
money to the owner of goods or 
properties in case of loss of such 
goods or properties on account of 
risk defined
Nature of 
expenses
Premium paid is personal 
expense
Premium paid is normally 
considered business expense
5.5.2 Health Insurance
Health insurance plans reimburse the insured for their medical expenses, which includes 
treatments, surgeries, hospitalization and likewise expenses which arise from injuries or 
illnesses. Such policy also provides coverage for any future medical expenses of the insured.
Like any other insurance policy, a health insurance policy is also a contract between the 
insurance company (the insurer) and the customer (an employer or an organization). Usually, 
the health insurance policy is renewed every year but at times it can also be for lifetime.
In India, health insurance usually reimburses for only hospitalization and for treatment at 
hospitals when the insured is hospitalized for at least 24 hours. The expenses for nursing, 
hospital bed, fees of surgeon or doctor’s consultation fees, operation theatre charges are 
covered in most of the cases. Certain diseases that are specified under the policy’s terms and 
conditions may be excluded from coverage or may be covered only after certain years of the 
policy issue date. Aesthetic treatments or any other treatment that does not require to stay in 
hospital, are also excluded from the policy.
In India, the Mediclaim policies were the first health policies. With the coming of private 
insurers, Indian insurance market saw the introduction of many innovative products like family 
floater plans, top-up plans, critical illness plans, hospital cash and top-up policies.
Classification of Health Insurance Plans
Hospitalization: Hospitalization plans are reimbursement plans that pay hospitalization and 
medical costs to the policy holder subject to the sum insured. In case of individual health 
policies, the sum insured is generally applied on a per member basis and in case of family 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 60
floater policies, sum insured is on a floater basis that can be utilized by any member who is 
insured under the plan. Generally, these policies do not pay any cash benefit.
There is another variant of hospitalization policy called a top-up policy. Top-up policies have 
a feature of high deductible which is typically set for a level of existing cover. This policy aims 
to cater to those people who have some base amount of insurance from their employer. 
People can add-on their insurance cover with this top-up policy, when the cover is not enough.
Family Floater: These plans cover the entire family under one health insurance plan. It works 
under the assumption that all family members will not suffer from illness at the same time. It 
covers hospital and other expenses.
Pre-Existing Disease Plans: It offers cover against diseases the policy holder had before 
buying his health policy e.g. diabetes, kidney ailment, coronary disease and others.
Senior Citizen Health Insurance: This health insurance plan is specially designed for the old 
age people. They provide cover from health issues during old age.
Maternity Health Insurance: Maternity health insurance ensures cover for maternity and 
other additional expenses. It takes care of both pre- and post-natal care, baby delivery (either 
normal or caesarean), ambulance charges, etc. These services are supervised by the 
Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 as amended in the year 2017.
Critical Illness Plans: These are benefit based policies which pay a lump sum (fixed) benefit 
amount on diagnosis of a covered critical illness and medical procedures. These illnesses are 
generally explicit and of high severity with low frequency in nature but involve high cost in 
comparison to the day to day medical treatment, e.g. heart attack, cancer etc. Some insurance 
companies also provide an option of staggered payment in combination with upfront lump sum 
payment.
Hospital Daily Cash Benefit Plans: This is usually a predefined benefit policy where the 
insurer pays a fixed sum of money for every day of hospitalization for a fixed number of days 
in the policy year, subject to certain deductions of a few days.
Long term and disability: There are also policies which meet a specific need, such as paying 
for long term care. Disability insurance, which substitutes loss of income due to illness or 
accident, is also considered as a health insurance policy, even though it is not precisely for 
medical expenses. The policy covers hospitalization because of accidental injury and 
sickness, subject to some exclusions and waiting periods, which are clearly being stated in 
the policy wordings.
How can one claim health insurance?
Cashless: In case of a cashless settlement, also called direct payment, the insurance 
company directly settles the admissible claim amount with the concerned hospital; and the 
insured person pays to the hospital those expenses which are not covered under his health 
insurance policy. Under the cashless scheme, the policyholder, and all those who are 
mentioned in the policy, can undertake treatment from the hospitals approved by the insurer.
Reimbursement: In case the policyholder is admitted in a hospital which is not under the 
network of his insurance company, he will have to make all the payments on his own to the 
hospital, and after staying for the duration of his treatment he has to submit these original 
bills/papers, along with the claim form, to the insurance company for reimbursement of his 
expenses, within the policy limits.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 61
In the light of rising healthcare costs, coupled with increasing demand for quality healthcare 
services and lack of easy access to such services to people from low income groups, health 
insurance is evolving as an alternative method for financing healthcare.
5.5.2.1 Taxation Aspect of Health Insurance Policies – Individuals, Family and 
dependent Senior Citizens
Every individual can claim a tax deduction under Section 80D of the Income Tax Act, 
1961, for his health insurance which is paid from his total income in any given 
year. One can also take the benefit of tax deduction by purchasing the health insurance 
policy to insure their spouse, dependent children and parents. These policies can be 
individual plans or a family floater. The children must be dependent on the parents for 
their insurance premium to be eligible for deduction. Health insurance premiums paid 
by parents for children who are not dependent on them are not allowed as a deduction 
for the parent. 
Section 80D: The quantum of tax benefit depends on the age of the individual who is 
insured. Explained below is the limit available under section 80D as applicable across 
various age groups.
No one over 60: In case no one in the family i.e. self, spouse and children, is over the 
age of 60, then deduction is available up to Rs. 25,000 only. For health insurance 
premium paid for the parents below the age of 60, the deduction is available up to Rs. 
25,000. Hence total deduction which one can claim in income tax is up to Rs. 50,000.
Either parent over 60: In case either one of the parents or both the parents is/are over 
the age of 60, deduction of up to Rs. 50,000 paid towards health insurance premiums 
for the parents is allowed. Also, premium paid for the family i.e. self, spouse and 
children, continues to be deductible up to Rs. 25,000, thereby making the total 
deduction available up to Rs. 75,000 in a year.
Eldest family member over 60: Where either self or spouse is over the age of 60, 
one can claim up to Rs. 50,000 in tax benefit on health insurance. Additionally, for 
parents over the age of 60, health insurance is also allowed up to Rs. 50,000 in 
deduction. So, total deduction in this case can be up to Rs. 1 lakh a year.
Super-senior citizens (80 years or above): Such citizens who do not have any health 
insurance policy can claim a deduction up to Rs. 50,000 every financial year towards 
medical check-ups and treatments.
 
Preventive Health Check-up
Any payment made towards preventive health check-ups entitles the taxpayer to a 
deduction of up to Rs. 5,000, within the overall limit of Rs. 25,000 / Rs. 50,000 as the 
case may be. This deduction can be claimed by either individual for himself, spouse, 
children who are dependent or parents. One can claim a health check-up deduction 
up to Rs. 5,000 inclusive of all the dependents in his or her family. However, this facility 
is not available independently for every individual family member.
HUF
Just like individual taxpayers, an HUF can also claim a deduction under section 80D 
for a health insurance taken for any of the members of the HUF. This deduction will be 
Rs. 25,000 for the insured member whose age is less than 60 years, and will be Rs. 
50,000 for the insured of 60 years of age or more.
The above deductions can be summarized as below:
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 62
Section 80DD - Medical Treatment of Disabled Dependent 
Deduction under this section is available to a resident individual or a HUF on:
(a) Expenditure spent on medical treatment (which includes nursing), training and 
rehabilitation of a handicapped dependent relative
(b) Deposit or payment to stated scheme for care of handicapped dependent relative:
(i) Where disability is between 40% and less than 80% (non-severe disability) – fixed 
deduction Rs. 75,000.
(ii) Where disability is 80% or more (severe disability) – fixed deduction Rs. 1,25,000.
Disability certificate shall be required from an approved medical authority for claiming 
deduction under this section.
Section 80DDB - Deduction for Medical Expenditure either on Self or 
Dependent for Specified Deceases
a. For individuals and HUFs whose age is below 60 years: A deduction up to the 
extent of Rs. 40,000 can be availed by a resident individual or a HUF. The deduction 
can be availed for the expenses incurred for the treatment of specified medical 
diseases or illnesses for himself or his dependents. In case of an HUF, such a 
deduction is available for medical expenses incurred for these prescribed ailments for 
any HUF members.
b. For senior citizens and super senior citizens: In case the individual on behalf of 
whom such expenses are incurred is a senior citizen, including super senior citizens, 
the deduction up to Rs. 1 lakh can be claimed by HUF or individual taxpayer.
However, one needs to get a prescription for such medical treatment from the 
concerned doctor / specialist in order to claim such a deduction.
The deductions can only be claimed if one pays the premium for his or her dependent 
children and not for independent children. Also, the premiums paid for health insurance 
availed by brothers/sisters do not qualify for tax deductions. Whereas the deduction 
can be claimed even when the parents and spouse are not dependent.
Single Premium Health Insurance Policies
Under Section 80D, where the taxpayer has made a premium payment in lump sum in 
a year for a policy which is valid for more than one year, he can claim a deduction of 
the proportionate amount. The appropriate fraction is arrived by dividing the lump sum 
premium paid, by the number of years of the policy. However, this is subject to the 
limits of Rs. 25,000 or Rs. 50,000 as the case may be.
Key Points
- Contribution towards health insurance plan has to be made to a scheme as 
specified by the Central Govt. /IRDAI.
- All premium payment modes are accepted by the insurer, except cash. Also, 
third party premium payments are not acceptable. 
- Senior citizen is defined as an individual resident of India whose age is 60 
years or more during the related financial year.
- The deduction cannot be claimed if the premium is paid for grandparents, 
brother, sister, aunts, uncles or any other relative.
- Premium paid for working children is not eligible for claiming deduction under 
this section. 
- In the case of part payment by the insured and a parent, both can claim a 
deduction to the extent paid by each.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 63
- The deduction has to be taken for the premium without showing the GST from 
the premium amount.
- For claiming deduction, premium payment receipt and policy copy which 
confirms the family member’s name and age and their relation should be 
preserved.
5.5.2.2 Taxation Aspect of Group Health Insurance Policies for Corporates
A group or corporate health insurance policy is purchased by an employer for eligible 
employees of a company as one of the key employee benefit packages. In certain 
instances, health insurance policy is part of an employer’s statutory obligations. Group 
health insurance plans may also provide cover to family members of employees.
These plans are designed to include and exclude members as they join and leave the 
company. These policies are generally low in premiums due to the reduced risks 
involved. These plans allow lenience in covering pre-existing illnesses amongst other 
things.
Tax benefit: Employers get taxation benefits on a group health insurance, as the policy 
can help in decreasing their tax liability. The employee should be in active employment 
for being eligible for taking policy benefits under group health. The tax deduction can 
be availed for the premium being paid by the employer. The company lists this amount 
as an expense for employee benefit in their financial statements.
However, Group Health Insurance premium provided by the company is not eligible for 
deduction by the employee.
5.5.3 Agriculture Insurance
Agriculture insurance (also called crop or farm insurance) is an important part of agriculture in 
India on account of two reasons. Firstly, agriculture is a risky business because of 
unpredictable and uncontrollable unrelated perils. Secondly, most farmers are small and have 
less ability to survive the agricultural risks. As such, agriculture insurance plays an important 
role in safeguarding their financial losses.
Agriculture insurance provides cover to the loss in crop production which might be caused due 
to natural disasters. It also covers the loss of revenue due to the fall in price of agricultural 
commodities. This policy is usually bought by farmers or planters.
In India agriculture insurance was started in 1985. Before that, the Comprehensive Crop 
Insurance Scheme (CCIS) was used to cover the major crop productions. Although plans 
extending insurance cover for crops in India have been in process since then, they have not 
been able to include the majority of the agricultural sector.
The Government has introduced many agricultural schemes in the country to protect farmers 
from natural disasters. These are:
National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS),
Pilot Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (WBCIS),
Pilot Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS), and
Pilot Coconut Palm Insurance Scheme (CPIS).
In 2003, the private players entered the market.
In 1999-2000, Rashtriya Krishi Bima Yojana or National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) 
was brought in by the Government. The scheme offers insurance cover for loss of food crops 
(pulses, oilseeds, cereals), and other horticultural, commercial crops. For food crops 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 64
the premium rates vary from 1.5% to 3.5% of the sum insured. In the case of commercial crops 
and horticulture, the actuarial rates are charged.
Small farmers can avail subsidy of 50% on the premiums from the government. The subsidy 
is distributed over a 5 years period, distributed uniformly between the Centre and the State 
Government.
NAIS operates either:
(a) On the basis of a premise approach where every mentioned crop has a set geographical 
area such as circle, mandal, block, tehsil, gram panchayat etc., or
(b) On an individual basis - for area specific calamities such as hailstorms, cyclones, 
landslides and floods.
Agriculture Insurance Company of India Ltd. (AIC) has been supervising and implementing 
agriculture insurance schemes in India since 1st April 2003, earlier done by General Insurance 
Corporation of India. Meanwhile, AIC also handles various kinds of insurance businesses 
which are linked to agriculture and related activities.
Benefits of Agriculture Insurance
- It benefits farmers to maintain agricultural credit flow
- Rationalizes loss assessment procedures
- Helps to build up precise statistical data of crop production
- Encourage farmers to implement progressive farming practices and better technology 
in agriculture
Depending on the policy opted by the farmer, his personal and property needs can be covered 
under the agriculture insurance policy. Some of the events covered under such policies are:
- Loss of the farmer’s property or damage caused due to fire or natural disaster (which 
includes storm, flood, tornado, earthquake, cyclone etc.)
- Cover for personal accident for the insured farmer and his family.
- Cover for loss of pump set
- Cover for damage/loss of tractor
- Cover for damage/loss caused by power failure
Farmers lack required documents and land records. This is one of the major reasons for their 
not availing the facility of agriculture insurance. Also, the compensation is often delayed and 
inadequate. Because of all these reasons the farmers face fund shortage and are not able to 
start their next cycle of crop cultivation.
Claim process
To begin with, the farmers must first register themselves with the insurance provider company. 
The insurance company will then offer the appropriate cover scheme to the farmer which will 
include market price from the past or a minimum support price guarantee. The premium for 
any type of price insurance has to be paid by the farmers. The government helps in the 
premium payment during the initial stage.
During the harvest period, in the notified market price goes less than the guaranteed price, 
then the farmer will be compensated by the insurer. In case of damage to the crops, first the 
yield data need to be received from the State Govt. according to the prescribed cut-off dates. 
Then the claims will be run down and settled by the investigating agency. Individual nodal 
banks will then receive the cheques related to the claim filed and the claim particulars. 
Individual banks then credit the accounts of the individual farmers and particulars of the 
beneficiaries are displayed on the bank’s notice board.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 65
5.5.4 Credit Insurance
Credit insurance covers the payment risk resulting from the delivery of goods or services, e.g. 
an Indian manufacturer sells his goods on credit to some international client and seeks 
protection against payment delays and non-payment by its buyers. The credit insurer covers 
a group of buyers. It pays a percentage of receivables, which were unpaid as a result 
of insolvency, bankruptcy or protracted default.
The buyer may be situated in the same country as the supplier or situated in another country. 
The credit insurance covers non-payment as a result of insolvency of the buyer or nonpayment after an agreed number of months after the due date. Credit insurance also insures 
risk of non-payment because of an event which was outside the control of the buyer or seller 
(political risk cover).
Credit insurance is designed to protect manufacturers from the risks due to default in payment. 
It enables them to expand their business without fear or loss. Some of the losses covered 
under this policy are on account of:
- Insolvency - protects business against the risk of non-payment if a buyer becomes 
insolvent.
- Protracted Default – protects when a buyer fails to pay the receivable within 
a predefined period calculated from the due date of payment of the receivable.
- Political Risks - These risks cover non-payment due to Moratorium, Transfer 
Restriction / Inconvertibility, War, Import/Export Restriction, Natural Disaster, License 
Cancellation etc.
5.5.4.1 Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Limited (ECGC)
ECGC Ltd. (Formerly known as Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd.) 
wholly owned by Government of India, was set up in 1957 with the objective of 
promoting exports from the country by providing credit risk insurance and related 
services for exports. Over the years it has designed different export credit risk 
insurance products to suit the requirements of Indian exporters. ECGC is essentially 
an export promotion organization, seeking to improve the competitiveness of the 
Indian exports by providing them with credit insurance covers.
The Corporation has introduced various export credit insurance schemes to meet the 
requirements of commercial banks extending export credit. The insurance covers 
enable the banks to extend timely and adequate export credit facilities to the exporters. 
ECGC keeps its premium rates at the optimal level.
ECGC provides:
(i) a range of insurance covers to Indian exporters against the risk of non –
realization of export proceeds due to commercial or political risks
(ii) different types of credit insurance covers to banks and other financial institutions 
to enable them to extend credit facilities to exporters, and
(iii) Export Factoring facility for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector 
which is a package of financial products consisting of working capital financing, credit 
risk protection, maintenance of sales ledger and collection of export receivables 
from the buyer located in overseas country.
(Source: www.commerce.gov.in)
5.5.4.2 Role of ECGC in facilitating International Trade
The role of the ECGC is wide and also within the scope of management of credit 
risk. Its primary role is to provide risk insurance products which cover losses and bad 
debts from exports. The ECGC also provides credit insurance to financial institutions 
so they can provide trade-risk cover to the exporters. In addition, ECGC also offers 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 66
overseas investment insurance to the Indian companies that are entering into 
international joint ventures, in the form of equity or loans.
ECGC provides guidance to exporters on export related activities, including creditrating based information for different countries. The ECGC also helps exporters 
arrange for export finance from financial institutions. Finally, it assists exporters with 
debt recovery and checking the credit worthiness of overseas customers.
5.5.5 Reinsurance (General Insurance Corporation of India Limited – GIC Re)
Insurance companies purchase Reinsurance to share and mitigate their risk. So, reinsurance 
occurs when different insurance companies share the risk by purchasing insurance policy from 
other insurers to limit their own total loss. By sharing the risk, an insurance company takes on 
clients whose cover would be too big for a single insurance company to handle alone. The 
premium paid by the insured is shared by all the insurance companies purchasing the 
reinsurance.
The company that first issues the policy is known as the primary insurer and the company 
which accepts the future liability from the primary insurer is known as the reinsurer. Primary 
companies ‘cede’ business to a reinsurer. Reinsurance can either be treaty or facultative. 
Treaties are agreements that cover extensive groups of policies, for example covering primary 
insurer’s all auto business. Facultative covers specific individual, high-value risks that would 
not be accepted under a treaty.
General Insurance Corporation of India (Global Reinsurance Solutions – GIC Re)
(Reference : www.gicofindia.com)
In India, general insurance business was nationalized by the General Insurance Business 
(Nationalization) Act, 1972 (GIBNA). The Government of India took over the shares of 55 
Indian insurance companies and the undertakings of 52 insurers carrying on general insurance 
business. General Insurance Corporation of India (GIC) was formed in pursuance of Section 
9(1) of GIBNA, incorporated in 1972 under the Companies Act, 1956 as a private company 
limited by shares. GIC was formed for the purpose of superintending, controlling and carrying 
on the business of general insurance. In November 2000, GIC was re-notified as the Indian 
Reinsurer.
GIC Re is the only reinsurer in the domestic market, which provides reinsurance directly to the 
general insurer in the Indian market. GIC Re receives statutory cession of 5% on every policy 
subject to certain limits. GIC has started running the reinsurance programs of various insurers 
in SAARC countries, South East Asia, Middle East and Africa.
GIC functions within the regulations of the following Acts:
- The Companies Act, 2013
- Insurance Act, 1938
- General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972
- General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Amendment Act, 2002
- Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999
5.5.5.1 Mandatory Provisions
The IRDAI (Reinsurance) Regulations were notified in the year 2018. These 
Regulations consolidated the provisions governing reinsurance business in India into 
one set of applicable regulations. They also introduced new requirements for both life 
and general reinsurance business. Some of the changes introduced by the 2018 
Regulations are summarized below.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 67
Applicability: The 2018 Regulations apply to insurance companies in India, insurance 
cooperative societies, legislative bodies doing insurance business and foreign 
reinsurance branches in India.
Reinsurance programs: The 2018 Regulations retain the objectives of the 
reinsurance program set out under the earlier regulations.
Retention policies: Every Indian insurance company who is dealing in life insurance 
business must now have to maintain at least 25% of the sum at risk for pure protection 
life insurance business portfolios and 50% for other portfolios. Separately, both Indian 
reinsurers and foreign reinsurance branches must retain at least 50% of their Indian 
business.
Maintenance of records: Indian insurance companies should submit all reinsurance 
contracts and a list of reinsurers in soft copy, with their respective credit rating.
Cross-border reinsurers: The definition of 'cross-border reinsurer' has been modified 
to mean a foreign reinsurer only, and it excludes foreign insurers. It does include parent 
or group companies of foreign reinsurance branches.
The 2018 Regulations serve to consolidate the existing Regulations for life and general 
reinsurance business in India. Filing requirements and processes have also been 
streamlined. The 2018 Regulations also bring about an important reform in permitting 
foreign reinsurance branches to compete with other Indian reinsurers for reinsurance 
of general insurance risks.
5.5.5.2 Concept of Ceding
An insurance company should have enough capital for paying all the future claims 
which are related to the issued policies. While this requirement protects the 
consumers, it limits the amount of business which an insurer can do. So, if the insurer 
can reduce its future liability of claims by transferring a part of it to another insurer, it 
can lower the amount of capital required to stay in good financial health to pay the 
claims of its policyholders. Capital freed up in this manner shall be able to support 
more or larger insurance policies. It also helps insurance companies maintain lower 
premiums for their policyholders.
A ceding company (also referred to as primary insurer) is an insurance company that 
passes the part of its risks to a reinsurance firm (also referred to as accepting 
company). Passing off risk in this manner allows the ceding company to hedge against 
undesired exposure to loss and to reduce their overall risk exposure and liability. This 
allows them to remain solvent even if they have to pay out a big insurance claim. The 
reinsurance company receives a premium in exchange for taking on the risk and pays 
the claim as and when it arises. The agreement between the primary insurer and the 
reinsurer is called the reinsurance contract, and it covers all terms related to the ceded 
risk.
5.5.6 Liability Insurance – Legal Liability Policies
Liability insurance provides protection to an individual and/or business against the risks that 
they may be held legally liable. Liability insurance offers protection to the insured against 
claims resulting from malpractice, injury, negligence and damage to people or 
property. The insurance company compensates the costs for which the insured party would 
be responsible if found legally liable.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 68
Put simply, it protects the insured against financial loss of his actions or negligence or if his 
property is found to cause injury or death to a person, or damage to a person's property or if 
a person suffers a loss while relying on the services or advice of the insured.
A liability insurance policy is most suitable to cover the business owners, professionals and 
self-employed people. It covers two main financial risks –
(a) the legal cost of defending a claim, and
(b) the compensation required to be paid.
There are three forms of liability insurance:
- Public liability
- Professional indemnity
- Product liability
5.5.6.1 Public Liability
Public liability insurance covers costs from legal action if any individual or entity is 
found liable for injury or death of another person, economic loss, or damage of property 
of another person resulting from any negligence on their part.
Though liability insurance is optional it is recommended for businesses as the 
likelihood of being sued for negligence is very high, and costly as well. So, purchasing 
this policy proves prudent. For example, in public events, liability insurance is 
compulsory and is also checked by the licensing authority.
Irrespective of whether it is mandatory or not, many companies procure liability 
insurance to avoid financial risk. Most times small industries do not purchase these 
policies as the premium amount could be high. Further, in all cases where risk is 
exceptionally high, insurers either refuse to insure these liabilities or charge an 
excessive premium.
Public liability insurance does not cover people or establishments involved in 
hazardous and criminal activities.
The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991
Hazardous industries pose risks from accidents not only to the persons employed but 
also to the public living in the vicinity. While the employees are protected under various 
laws, members of the public have to go through a long legal process for any 
compensation. More often, such people are from economically weaker sections of the 
society.
To bring some relief to the sufferings of the public due to accidents in 
hazardous installations, Public Liability Insurance was made mandatory and 
Public Liability Insurance Bill was introduced in the Parliament.
The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991, provides for mandatory Public Liability 
Insurance. Under Section 4 of the Act, every owner, before starting to handle 
any hazardous substance, has to take Public Liability Insurance policies 
covering liabilities. This is meant to provide immediate relief to any person 
suffering injury or death or damage to property and for other incidental and 
connected matters.
Some of the provisions under the Act are as below:
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 69
Application for Relief: An application for relief shall be made by the victim to 
the Collector within 5 years of the accident. He shall also give notice to the 
owner and the insurer, while giving them an opportunity of being heard. The 
Collector shall make the award determining the amount of relief payable. The 
victim can approach the Court for higher compensation.
Establishment of Relief Fund: The Central Government is empowered under 
Section 7A of the Act to establish an Environment Relief Fund by notification in 
the official Gazette. This fund is utilised for the payment of relief under the 
awards made by the collector.
Power to Call for Information, Entry and Inspection: The Act empowers the 
Central Government to call for information, entry, inspection, search and 
seizure of the premises of the hazardous installation wherein the owner is 
obligated to submit all such information to the inspecting agencies.
Offences and Penalties: The Act provides for the penalties of not taking a 
public liability insurance policy. Furthermore, failure to comply with the 
directions issued with regard to regulation of handling of hazardous substances 
etc. is punishable with imprisonment or fine or both depending on the 
circumstances.
Environmental Impairment Liability (EIL)
Environmental damage refers to the injurious presence of solid, liquid, 
gaseous, or thermal contaminants, irritants, or pollutants on land, atmosphere 
or water body. Sometimes, the damage caused by the pollution can be 
immediate, while other times it becomes evident years after the event.
Also called pollution legal liability plan, Environmental Impairment Liability (EIL) 
covers pollution and environmental damage. An EIL policy covers for injury, 
property damage, natural resource damage, clean-up costs and others 
resulting from pollution emanating from a site or location. As such companies 
at risk for losses associated with pollution purchase such policies.
Organizations buy EIL cover because they might hold environmental risk due 
to their operations. Some examples would be:
- chemical companies handle substances which can go underground and 
poison an entire drinking water supply.
- By-products from a manufacturing company’s operations can find their 
way through agriculture fields and water bodies leading to damage of 
natural resources.
- Tanning industries might dispose their waste in open plots thereby 
leading to mass infection and spread of disease
The liability associated with these risks is high and so companies look to 
transfer such risks by purchasing EIL cover.
EIL policies are written on a claims-made basis. The claim must be first 
reported during the policy period, and the pollution condition in the claim must 
have occurred after the retroactive date of the policy.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 70
5.5.6.2 Product Liability
In general terms, law requires that every product should meet the ordinary 
expectations of the consumer. When a product has a defect or danger, it cannot be 
said to have met the ordinary expectations of the consumer.
Product liability governs the liability of manufacturers, and sellers in the distribution 
chain, for injury to a person or property by the consumption or use of the product sold. 
Product liability law is to help protect consumers from dangerous or defective products, 
and hold the manufacturers and sellers responsible for placing such defective products 
in the hands of a consumer.
Product liability insurance, therefore, covers the risk faced by the manufacturers and 
others in the distribution chain for third party damage, injury or harm, illness, accidental 
death or to a business or property by their product or service. It also covers liabilities 
which may arise out of packaging defects, absence of warning labels/precautions etc. 
which might affect the performance or quality of the product. People might also take 
action against the manufacturer if they believe that they have been injured by a 
particular product.
Product liability insurance can be taken by the product manufacturers, and all partners 
in the seller chain. This policy also extends to cover vendors of the manufacturers or 
the sellers.
The laws relating to product liability, in India, have been constantly evolving for the 
protection of consumers. The Courts are adopting a pro-consumer approach by 
awarding compensation and damages which are more punitive than compensatory in 
nature.
5.5.6.3 Professional Indemnities
Professional indemnity policies are designed to protect various professionals such as 
doctors, engineers, architects, lawyers, financial consultants etc who provide advice 
or service to their clients. It is designed to protect such professionals from legal costs 
and claims which could arise from monetary loss or damage of property after following 
the advice or receiving service.
Along with the business, such policies should also cover any director, partner, 
employee or related entity when they act within the scope of their overall duties. Such 
policies cover all amounts which the insured professional becomes legally liable to pay 
as damages to the third party. Sometimes it also provides for the defence cost of the 
lawyer subject to the overall limit of the indemnity selected. In all such policies, only 
civil liability claims are covered while any liability arising out of any criminal act or act 
committed in violation of any law is not covered.
In professional liability, the claim amount is unknown. So, insurers set a limit to liability 
to which they will bear the loss and the balance has to be borne by the person taking 
such a cover. The basic rate of premium for a professional indemnity policy ranges 
from 0.30% to 1% of the amount insured. To a large extent the premium depends on 
factors such as profession, experience, income limits, jurisdiction and claim 
experience. 
5.5.6.4 Employer’s Liability Insurance
Employers are responsible for the health and safety of their employees while they are 
at work and may be held liable for an accident arising out of the general course of 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 71
employment. For example, a worker may get injured due to the chemicals in his factory, 
or an employee might get food infection from the canteen food.
Employers’ liability insurance enables the employers to compensate the cost of 
injuries, illness or fatality of their employees’ on account of workplace conditions or 
practices, whether they are caused on site or off site. Through Employers’ liability 
insurance, the employers not only indemnify themselves against any such unfortunate 
events but also save themselves from the financial losses and legal cases.
Public liability insurance is different. It covers claims made by members of the public 
or other businesses, but not the claims made by the employees.
Employer’s Liability Act, 1938
Employer’s Liability Act, 1938 was enacted for the protection of workmen at their 
workplaces and to safeguard their related interests. Employers’ Liability Act, 1938 
clearly defines the employer with respect to the workers deputed either by the 
contractors or by the manpower supply agencies. So, the Act comes handy when 
doubts are raised by the employers with regard to their liability towards the workmen, 
especially when they are engaged through contractors or when they are outsourced.
The Act restricts the events and the extent to which employers shall be liable to their 
employees occurring in the course of their employment. It abolishes the common rule 
that the employer is not liable if the injury is caused by the fault or negligence of a 
fellow employee.
The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923
The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 was formed primarily to give 
compensations to workmen, and their dependants, in case of injury and 
accident (including certain occupational diseases) in the course of employment 
resulting in disablement or death. The Act aims to ensure that workmen have 
a meaningful life post-accident while performing their duty.
The Act is recognized all over India. It applies to all workmen, including casual 
workers, in factories, construction work, mines, circuses, plantations, transport, 
railways, ships and any other potentially dangerous occupations as specified 
in Schedule II of the Act. It is also applicable to workmen of Indian companies 
who are sent to work abroad. The Act is not applicable to defence personnel.
The Act offers relief to the workers who would otherwise go to court to seek 
compensation if they get injured during their employment. The compensation 
paid to a workman is in the form of a relief and social security measure provided 
by the Act. The Act also defines the amount to be paid depending on the 
intensity of the injury. For an employer to pay compensation, the injury or death 
suffered by the workman must be on account of an ‘accident arising out of and 
in the course of his employment’.
The Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 (ESI)
The Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 is a beneficial and social legislation. 
Its aim is to provide financial backing and support to people working in factories 
and establishments in times of medical distress resulting in loss of wages or 
earning capacity. The medical situations could be sickness, maternity 
disorders, disability (temporary or permanent), death due to employment injury, 
occupational disease.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 72
The Act is applicable to non-seasonal factories. It has since been extended to 
shops, hotels, restaurants, cinemas, road transport undertakings, newspaper 
establishments, private medical and educational institutions wherever 10, or 
more than 10, people are employed. However, in some states the threshold for 
coverage of establishments is 20 employees. With effect from January 1, 2017, 
the monthly wage should not exceed Rs. 21,000 for such employees.
As per provisions of the Act, the principal employers under this Act have to pay 
a sum of money to the Employees State Insurance Corporation (ESIC). This 
money is later payable by ESIC to the employees for their benefits. The 
contribution payable to ESIC shall comprise the employer's contribution and 
employee's contribution at a specified rate. At present the employee's 
contribution rate is 0.75% of the wages and that of the employer is 3.25% of 
the wages paid/payable. Employees who receive a daily average wage up to 
Rs.137 are exempted from paying their own contribution, but the employers will 
continue to contribute the employers’ share for these employees.
Section 46 of the Act provides social security benefits such as medical benefit, 
sickness benefit, maternity benefit, disability benefit and dependents’ 
benefit. In addition, the scheme also provides some other need based benefits 
to insured workers such as vocational rehabilitation, physical rehabilitation and 
old age medical care.
Role or Powers of Employees State Insurance Corporation (ESIC)
Under Section 2-A of the ESI Act it is mandatory for every organization meeting 
the requirement of the number of employees to register itself under the ESI 
scheme within 15 days of their registration. Once the organization gets covered 
under the ESI Act, it remains covered even if the number of employees 
reduces.
When any person joins an organization, it is compulsory for him to provide his, 
and his family details, to such an organization for online registration. Upon 
registration, a 17 digit identification number is generated by the organization 
using the ESIC portal. The organization has to print the identity certificate and 
affix a photograph provided by the employee and authenticate the certificate. 
The same identification number is to be used by the employee even in case of 
change of place or employment.
The organization has to maintain the employee’s wage record, attendance 
sheet, books of accounts, inspection book and accident register. The 
organization is required to file its monthly contributions on the ESIC portal every 
month. Contributions are deducted and paid depending on the total wage 
earned by the employee. Overtime is not included when calculating the wages 
of an employee. If the wages of any employee exceed Rs. 21,000 per month, 
then he will be covered under the scheme benefit only till the end of the 
contribution period. Any employee who fails to pay his contribution in the given 
time period will have to pay an interest of 12% per annum for each day of delay 
on payment.
In case of an untimely death of the covered employee, due to an injury or 
disease contracted from the work environment, all his benefits will be paid to 
the nominee. In addition, funeral expenses of the deceased employee are 
reimbursed to the dependents/family members. The benefit shall be paid by 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 73
the bank after his case has been analyzed and approved within 21 days from 
the last contribution month.
A public grievances redressal system has also been set up by ESIC to help in 
queries or issues of the workers and employees under the ESI scheme.
The Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions 
Act, 1953
The Employees' Provident Funds & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 was 
brought by the government with an objective of making post-retirement 
provisions for the industrial workers, and their dependents in case of their 
death. It provides cover to workers against risks of old age, retirement, 
retrenchment or death. It is applicable to every establishment as specified in 
Schedule I of the Act and employing 20 or more persons.
The Act is administered by the Government through the Employees' Provident 
Fund Organization (EPFO) which works under the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment.
EPFO provides for the provident fund, family pension and deposit-linked 
insurance for the employees in factories and other establishments. 
Accordingly, the following three schemes are in operation under the Act:
- Employees' Provident Fund (EPF) Scheme, 1952
- Employees' Deposit Linked Insurance (EDLI) Scheme, 1976
- Employees' Pension Scheme (EPS), 1995
These schemes provide old age and survivorship benefits, long term protection 
and security to the employee and after his death to his family members, loans 
during sickness and for the purchase or construction of a dwelling during the 
period of his membership.
The employer and employee contribute 12% each of the employee’s salary 
(basic + dearness allowance subject to a maximum of Rs. 15,000) to the EPF. 
The 12% employer’s contribution is split into 3.67% for the EPF account and 
8.33% for the EPS account. Apart from this, an additional 0.5% has to be paid 
by the employer towards EDLI.
EPFO sets a fixed interest on these contributions every year depending upon 
the rate which is pre-decided by the GOI along with the Central Board of 
Trustees. The trustees board consists of representatives from the government, 
the employers and the employees. The annual interest rate for the year 2019 -
2020 is 8.50 %. The interest earned is directly transferred to the EPF account 
of the employee account every year. 
The accrued amount in the fund can be withdrawn by the nominee or legal heirs 
after employee’s death or can be withdrawn by the employee himself upon 
resignation. The withdrawals are tax free subject to various provisions under 
the Income Tax Act.
The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961
The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 is designed to protect the employment of a 
woman during the time of her maternity. It entitles her to a full-paid absence 
from work at the rate of her average daily wage in the three months preceding 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 74
her maternity leave. Every establishment having 10 or more employees needs 
to apply this Act in their workplace/establishment. The law mandates that 
employers must inform women in writing about the maternity benefits available 
under the Act, at the time of their joining the workforce.
In order to claim benefits under the Act, a woman must have been working as 
an employee in the establishment for at least 80 days within the last 12 
months. Women having two surviving children are eligible for 26 weeks of paid 
leave and women having more than two children get 12 weeks of paid leave. 
Out of the 26 weeks, if desired, a woman can claim up to 8 weeks before the 
delivery. In case of a miscarriage, a woman can claim 6 weeks of paid leave 
with average pay from the date of miscarriage. If a woman adopts a child, then 
also she will get a 12-week long paid maternity leave.
The law allows women employees to work from home after the expiry of the 26 
weeks' leave period if the nature of work allows and on terms that are mutually 
agreeable with the employer. As per the Act every establishment employing 50 
or more employees also has to provide a mandatory crèche facility. As an 
additional protection, discharge or dismissal of the women employee by the 
establishment is not permissible while she is on maternity leave. In all cases of 
death of the pregnant employee, the maternity benefit shall be paid to the 
person nominated by such an employee or to her legal representative.
The Act imposes punishment/penalty if an employer does not pay maternity 
benefits as per the Act to an eligible woman.
The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
Gratuity is a voluntary payment made by the employer to the employee in 
recognition of his continuous, meritorious service. Gratuity comes under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. The gratuity scheme is available to people 
working in factories, mines, oilfields, plantations, ports, railway companies and 
shops or establishments in which 10 or more persons are employed, or have 
been employed on any day of the last 12 months.
Gratuity is payable to an employee (or to a nominee in case of his death) who 
has rendered continuous service of 5 years or more at the time of his 
termination of employment, superannuation, retirement or resignation. 
However, completion of continuous service of 5 years is not necessary where 
the termination of employment is due to death or disablement due to accident 
or disease.
Gratuity amount depends on two factors – the last drawn salary and the number 
of years of service. The maximum gratuity amount that is at present tax exempt 
cannot exceed Rs. 20 lakhs in total from one or more employers.
The gratuity payable to an employee can be wholly forfeited if the employee 
has been terminated for his disorderly conduct, act of violence or moral 
turpitude in the course of his employment.
5.6 Motor Insurance
All vehicles running on the road have to compulsorily take motor insurance. It offers protection 
against bodily injuries, death, physical damage and third party liabilities arising out of accidents 
involving motor vehicles.  Motor Insurance policies are subject to the basic principles 
applicable to property and liability insurance in general. The owner of the vehicle bears a legal 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 75
relationship to the vehicle whereby he stands to benefit by the safety of the vehicle, and stands 
to lose by any loss, damage, injury or creation of liability.
Motor insurance can be broadly classified into three heads.
Car Insurance provides coverage against accidental loss or damages to own car or to a third 
party. The premium amount depends on the make, the value of the car and year of 
manufacturing. Two-wheeler insurance provides protection for users of all kinds of twowheelers. The two-wheeler policy has similar features as that of a car insurance. Commercial 
Vehicle Insurance provides protection to commercial vehicles that are used for other than 
personal purposes, such as for carrying goods.
5.6.1 The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 is laid by an Act of Parliament. It regulates all aspects of the 
road transport vehicles. As per the Act, no motor vehicle can be used in public places unless 
it carries an insurance policy issued by an authorized insurer. The cover ensures the insured's 
liability in respect of death or bodily injury to third parties and also damage to property of third 
parties.
Some of the reasons for formulation of the Act are listed below:
- Concern for road safety standards, and pollution-control measures, standards for 
transportation of hazardous and explosive materials.
- Need for effective ways of tracking down traffic offenders.
- Stricter procedures relating to grant of driving licences and the period of validity 
thereof.
- Provision for issuing fitness certificates of vehicles also by the authorized testing 
stations.
- Provision for higher compensation in all cases of hit and run motor accidents and 
also in “no-fault liability”.
- Provision for compensation from the insurer to the victims of motor accidents 
amounting to actual liability for all classes of vehicles.
- Maintenance of State registers for driving licences and vehicle registration.
- Constitution of Road Safety Councils.
- Providing adequate compensation to victims of road accidents without going into long 
drawn procedure. Protecting consumers’ interest in the transport sector.
- Concern for road safety standards, transport of hazardous chemicals and pollution 
control.
- Delegation of greater powers to State Transport Authorities and rationalizing the role 
of public authorities in certain matters.
5.6.2 The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2019
The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2019, was brought about to amend the Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1988, and address issues related to road safety, third party insurance, vehicle’s fitness 
and compensation for victims of road accidents.
Main features of the Bill are:
- Increased penalties for traffic violations and stricter provisions for offences such as 
drunken driving, juvenile driving, driving without license, over-speeding, dangerous 
driving and overloading.
- Mandatory fitness testing for vehicles, removing unfit vehicles, setting standards for 
vehicle testing.
- Penalty for those who deliberately violate safety and environmental regulations.
- Recall of defective motor vehicles if there is a likelihood that the defect may cause a 
threat to the environment.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 76
- Setting up of a National Road Safety Board to advise the government on all aspects of 
road safety, registration and licensing of vehicles.
- Incorporate ‘Good Samaritan’ guidelines for those who come forward to help road 
accident victims.
- Compensation for road accident victims, scheme for cashless treatment of road 
accident victims through prompt medical care.
- Constitution of Motor Vehicle Accident Fund by the Central government to provide 
compulsory insurance cover to all road users in India.
5.6.3 Motor Accident Claims Tribunal
Motor Accident Claims Tribunal was set up under the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988. Its purpose is to provide a speedier remedy to the victims of motor vehicle related 
accidents. The Tribunals take away jurisdiction of the Civil Courts in all such matters which 
concerns the motor accidents.
The Tribunal can adjudicate upon claims for compensation when the accident, arising out of 
the use of a motor vehicle, involves death or bodily injury to the person, or damage to the 
property of the third party.
According to the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, compensation can be claimed by the person who 
has sustained injury in an accident involving motor accident, or by the owner of the damaged 
vehicle or property, or by a nominee/heir/legal representatives of the deceased who died in 
the accident, or by the duly authorized agent of the injured person. There is no time limit for 
filing the accident claim. But, in cases of an unusual delay in filing the claims, the Tribunal 
might seek explanations.
Claim petition can be filed by the concerned person in that Claims Tribunal which has a 
jurisdiction over the area in which either the accident occurred, or where the claimant 
resides/carries on business, or where the defendant resides. Appeals from the Claims Tribunal 
lie with the High Courts. It has to be filed by the concerned person within 90 days from the 
date of award of the Tribunal.
5.6.4 Types of Losses
Motor insurance broadly provides two types of cover:
(A) Comprehensive cover which provides for loss or damage to the insured (own) vehicle and 
also provides for third party liability for (a) bodily injury and/or death, and (b) property damage.
(B) Liability cover which provides only for the third party liability for (a) bodily injury and/or 
death, and (b) property damage. Personal accident cover for owner/driver is also included in 
this cover.
5.6.4.1 Loss or damage to the Vehicle (Own Damage)
This policy provides for covers against loss or damage to the insured vehicle and/or its 
accessories due to:
- Fire, explosion, self-ignition, lightening
- Burglary, housebreaking, theft
- Riot, strike
- Earthquake, Flood, typhoon, hurricane, cyclone and other similar disasters
- Accidental external means
- Malicious act
- Terrorist activity
- Vehicles in transit by road, rail, waterway, lift, air or any other mode
The policy can also be extended later on to cover additional risks on payment of extra 
premium:
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 77
- Any damage or loss caused to the accessories fitted inside the motor vehicle
- Personal accident cover under private car policies for passengers and paid 
drivers
- Legal liability to employees
- Legal liability to passengers in commercial vehicles
However, some of the policy exclusions in this cover are:
- Wear and tear, mechanical/electrical breakdown, failures or breakages
- Damage of tyres unless the motor vehicle is itself damaged at the same time
- Any accidental loss or damage suffered under the influence of liquor or drugs
In case of an accidental damage to the motor vehicle, the policy holder should 
immediately inform the nearest office of the insurer. Thereafter, he is required to submit 
the claim form along with a copy of the Registration Certificate of the vehicle, driving 
license of the driver of the vehicle at the time of accident, estimate of the repairs 
required and other documents as mandated by the insurer. Once the initial 
documentation is complete, the vehicle will be surveyed by the company appointed 
surveyor, who shall submit his report to the company. At times, insurance companies 
also require that the salvage amount of the damaged parts are deposited with them 
after approval of the claim.
In case of a theft of the vehicle, the owner must immediately lodge a First Information 
Report (F.I.R) with the police and submit the Final Police Report to the insurance 
company as soon as it is received. Once the claim is approved by the company, the 
Registration Certificate of the vehicle is to be transferred in the name of the company, 
keys of the vehicle have to be handed over to the company, and a letter of Subrogation 
and Indemnity, on a stamp paper duly notarized, is also to be submitted for settling the 
claim.
5.6.4.2 Third Party Liability – Compulsory Insurance
Third Party Liability cover only provides indemnity to the insured, in the event of an 
accident caused by the use of the motor vehicle. In such a cover, the insured is liable 
to pay for:
- Death or injury to any person, including the occupants of the motor vehicle
- Damage of property which does not belong to the insured
In case of a third party liability, the policyholder must immediately inform the insurance 
company of the incidence likely to give rise to liability claim. A claim form, duly filled in, 
along with copies of Registration Certificate, Diving License, FIR are to be submitted 
to the insurance company at the earliest. If any summons is received from Court, the 
same should also be sent to the insurance company immediately.
5.7 Policy Document and Legal Implications
Any insurance policy is an integrated contract in the form of an Agreement between the 
insured and the insurer. It is a policy of assurance subject to conditions and privileges of the 
policy document.
A policy document is a standard, formal document which contains all the details of the 
insurance contract, under different sections. It lists the details of the insured (name, date of 
birth, address, contact details etc.), the policy schedule, key covers under the policy, including 
the extensions and exclusions. It clearly mentions the free-look period, the benefits under the 
policy plan, rights of the insured, details of the policy cover and suicide exclusion clause 
amongst other general provisions. It also spells out the name of the product, its UIN (unique 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 78
identification number) as listed under IRDAI. If the policy has been sold through the agency 
channel or an insurance agent their details are also mentioned in the policy document.
The insurance contract is legally enforceable and both the parties to the contract are bound 
by the terms and conditions listed in the policy document during the entire term of the 
policy. The policy document is issued by the insurer once the first premium has been paid by 
the insured. Policy document is, in fact, a bible for the insured and the insurer.
5.7.1 Proposal Form
A proposal form is the most basic document, required to be completed by the proposer at the 
time of applying for an insurance policy. It is a legal document which helps the insurance 
company evaluate all the potential risks in relation to the insurance policy being offered. The 
form is designed to seek all the relevant information from the proposer which then helps the 
insurance company in underwriting and deciding the premium amount. Insurance company, 
therefore, offers a policy on the basis of the proposal form.
A proposal form seeks fundamental information of the proposer and also on the subject matter 
of insurance. This includes the name, age, address, occupation details of the proposer. Some 
other important elements of information gathered through the proposal form are:
- Medical history of the life to be assured and the health status of his or her family 
members in case of health insurance.
- Claim history and details of previous related losses, whether insured or not.
- Other past or present related insurances for assessing the moral hazard of the 
proposer.
- Whether any insurance of the proposer was previously declined by any other insurers.
- Nominee details.
- Some high-value risk policies require income details of the proposer to satisfy the 
insurer about the proposer's ability to pay for the insurance and the need for his 
insurance.
- Amount of insurance cover required - it must represent the actual value of the property 
or the subject matter of insurance.
- A declaration stating that responses given in the proposal form are true and nothing 
has been concealed or misrepresented.
Every proposal form is to be signed by the proposer or by the authorized person when the 
proposer is not an individual. The signature has to be dated as well on the proposal form.
5.7.2 Policy Component
Once the proposer buys the insurance policy, the insurer sends him a printed copy of his policy 
document, along with the receipt of payment. Every policy document contains standard 
sections, also called components, which list out the terms and conditions, facts, statements, 
the do’s and don’ts. The insurance regulator IRDAI and the Insurance Act, 1938 mandate 
provisions which need to be featured in the policy component.
All the important aspects of the insurance contract, framed in a policy, are listed in the policy 
document under various components. For a general insurance policy, the three 
crucial components of insurance policies are the premium, the policy limit, and the 
deductibles.
5.7.2.1 Heading
The heading of an insurance policy states the name of the policy, such as ‘Private 
Car Package Policy’ or ‘Standard Fire and Special Perils Policy’ or ‘Burglary Insurance 
Policy’ etc. The heading might vary occasionally between insurer to insurer, but mostly 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 79
standard wordings are maintained throughout the industry for the benefit and easy 
understanding of the policy holder. Below the heading, the UIN number of the product, 
as provided by IRDAI, is also mentioned compulsorily to avoid any anomaly about the 
product and its features.
5.7.2.2 Preamble
Preamble in an insurance policy is the declaration by the insurer. It is an introductory 
paragraph in a contract that identifies the type of agreement, the date on which the 
agreement is signed, parties to the agreement, their status (whether they are 
individuals or entities), and their addresses. It can be said to be a preliminary statement 
at the beginning of a statute, stating its purpose and explaining the reason for its 
enactment.
In other words, the preamble simply says that the insurers will, in return for the 
premium, pay the losses or claims made under the policy. Most policies have a 
distinct preamble, although some policies may not.
5.7.2.3 Operative Clause
The operative clause in a policy is a promissory clause. It is a promise that the insurer 
undertakes to pay the benefits of the policy to the insured if the reason(s) for which 
the policy was incepted happens while the policy is still in force. It is the single most 
important clause because it defines what is covered by the policy. The operative clause 
is framed as widely as possible. However, by way of an extension the insurer may offer 
covers that are wider than those mentioned in the operative clause.
5.7.2.4 Policy Schedule
A schedule of insurance is that part of an insurance contract which sets out the details 
specific to the policy. It is issued by the insurer as part of the policy. It provides details 
of the insured’s policy including full description of properties covered which are in force, 
the period of cover against the properties described, the amount of coverage, the 
exclusions, the deductibles, and the payment mode and schedule.
Policy schedule is also called schedule of insurance. The purpose of a schedule of 
insurance is to provide clarification to the insurer and the insured about what all is 
covered in the policy. A schedule is not a stand-alone document from the policy 
wording itself and should always be read in conjunction with the policy wording.
5.7.2.5 Signatures
Every insurance policy is a legally enforceable contract. As such, a duly constituted 
attorney or signatory of the insurance company has to affix his signature on each page 
of the insurance policy document, for and on behalf of the company. The insurance 
company also puts its seal thereby legalizing the document. If there are any annexures 
or addendums to the policy document, the same have to be signed and stamped as 
above.
5.7.2.6 Exceptions
Exceptions are those situations, circumstances or conditions which are not covered by 
the insurance company in the contract. So, at the time of buying a policy, the proposer 
should read in detail the exclusions mentioned in the policy brochure. Exceptions are 
applicable to all sections of the policy. The insurer clearly states that under the policy 
the company shall not be liable to the Exceptions mentioned therein.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 80
The IRDAI Act, 1999 and the Insurance Act, 1938 mandate that the prospectus of 
every insurance product shall clearly state the Exceptions where the company can 
deny claim and call the policy void.
General exceptions in a Private Car Package Policy read as:
‘The Company shall not be liable under this policy in respect of
1. any accidental loss or damage and/or liability caused sustained or incurred outside 
the geographical area;
2. any claim arising out of any contractual liability;
3. any accidental loss or damage and/or liability directly or indirectly caused by or 
contributed to by or arising from contamination by radioactivity;
3. any accidental loss or damage and/or liability directly or indirectly arising out of war, 
invasion, hostilities etc.’
5.7.2.7 Conditions
All policy documents list down, under different sections, the terms and conditions of 
the policy to be followed by the policyholder. It also lists their rights and privileges as 
a customer of the policy. The motive is to educate the policy holder on all aspects of 
the product purchased by him.
By doing this, the insurer expects the policy holder to maintain his policy for the entire 
term in a rightful way so that there are no claim denials or the policy does not lapse for 
lack of information. Given below are some of the important sections covered in the 
insurance policy document:
- Definitions of words and phrases used in the policy document
- Benefits covered under the plan
- Claim process
- Premium payment
- Assignment and nomination
- Termination of policy
- Dispute redressal process
- Communication and notices
- Governing laws and jurisdiction
- Details of Ombudsman
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 81
Chapter 6: Various Provisions and 
Perspectives for Policyholders
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
6-1 Evaluate benefits and limitations of holding multiple policies with different insurers 
6-2 Describe group insurance policies by employers and their sufficiency
6-3 Determine merits/demerits of surrendering insurance policy 
6-4 Explain benefits and limitations of Keyman insurance from personal and organizational 
perspectives
6-5 Distinguish between Offline and Online Insurance Policies
6-6 Discuss global coverage of different life and general insurance policies
Topics
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 82
6.1 Provisions in insurance when the insurance is taken from 
multiple companies
Life Insurance Policies
As you experience major life changes such as buying a house, getting married, having a
child, starting a business etc. that significantly impacts your financial liabilities, it makes sense 
to commensurately increase the life insurance cover. It involves buying additional life 
insurance policy or increasing the cover limit on the current policy.
If you have multiple life goals, life insurance companies offer plans for each of your goals, be 
it children’s education, other endowment policies and deferred annuities. With a term life 
policy, you can buy new coverage with a term length tailored to your life event, like a policy 
that lasts for the length of a business loan or home loan for the number of years you plan to 
financially support your family and their life goals. A good way is to buy reducing term 
insurance which is linked to your loan balance, also called the ladder strategy. It involves 
buying multiple term life insurance policies with different term lengths that expire as you pay 
down your debts. This allows you to pay lower premiums over the lifetime of multiple policies 
than if you paid a single premium for the life of one higher-coverage policy.
One benefit of having policies from different and multiple insurers is to have a risk 
management in place apart from having competitive premium rates. If guarding against this 
risk is important for you, holding policies with multiple companies allows you to spread this 
risk across more than one insurer. However, one should avoid applying to multiple insurers at 
the same time to prevent complications later. It is a known fact that the purpose of insurance 
is not benefiting from it, but to financially restore the earlier state in case of unfortunate event 
of loss.
Life is irreplaceable, but everybody has a human life value. Usually a person’s current income, 
earning capacity and other potentialities like assets would determine how much coverage one 
should have. A life insurance company to which an insurance is proposed will ask the details 
(extent of life cover and the type of policies) of all previous life insurance policies in order to 
determine whether the insured life has an uncovered value which can be additionally insured. 
A person may have liabilities the extent of which is unlimited to have a strong basis for 
insurance. The total coverage across all life insurance policies of an individual cannot be more 
than the future income to be earned by that individual. Another factor to be kept in mind by an 
insurer is the premium paying capacity keeping in the purview an individual current gross 
income, disposable income and potentiality for increase in that income. 
Such restrictions of human life value however do not apply strictly to endowment plans. The 
current and future earning potential are dominant parameters here to assess the insured’s 
premium bearing capacity. The life cover in with-profit policies is usually a small portion relative 
to premium when compared with the same metric in term life policies. 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 83
Non-life Insurance Policies
Under non-life insurance the losses incurred from a specific financial event are compensated 
to the insured. The physical assets (property, valuables, durables, vehicles, etc.) and the legal 
liabilities are usually covered under a non-life insurance policy. The amount specified in the 
policy is the sum insured which, during the policy period, is the insurer’s maximum liability for 
claims. Also, the policy period of a non-life insurance plan is usually short, i.e., one year. The 
claim is not fully borne by the insurance company. The policyholder needs to pay a small share 
called deductible. If no claims are made under a general insurance policy, then the 
policyholder is awarded a discount called no-claim bonus.
While buying general insurance, you are required to fill proposal forms wherein the insurer
asks for disclosure of any existing policy. If the policies are from two different insurers, then
each of the companies need to be informed about the other policy. Insurance companies need
this information as most policies come with a contribution clause which means that if the same 
insured person has more than one policy, all the policies will contribute in equal proportion to 
the sum insured in case of a claim.
If you have two indemnity policies, you have the right to choose the policy under which you
want to make the claim first. If the claim amount is higher than the sum insured under the
policy on which you first made the claim, you can claim the balance bill amount on the second 
policy. One should always remember to check the older policy first, as the waiting period and 
pre-existing exclusions are likely to have been completed in the older policy.
For individuals, the insured assets are usually not so large in value that one may need multiple 
insurers. However, if certain perils are not covered by one insurer, one may approach an 
insurer to cover the same. It may however be advisable to seek coverage from more than one 
health insurer to have better network of health facilities (hospitals) apart from the top-up 
provision. 
For the corporate that insure manufacturing facilities, plants and machinery, warehouses, 
finished goods, inventory, fleet of business utilities (aircrafts, ships, road-lines and other 
carriers), shipments of plant and machinery and other goods, office premises with gadgets, 
etc. it is advisable that multiple policies be obtained with contribution limits and with specific 
perils covered including umbrella policy to have a proper risk management plan in place. Even 
insurance companies may like to participate in combination as the risk covered is large in 
value. The insurance companies may also seek reinsurance facility in case they take up the 
coverage singly.
6.2 Provisions related to employer provided and group policies –
benefits/limitations
Group Life Insurance
Many a times organized employment features group insurance from the employer as part of 
employee benefit. There is no individual underwriting of each employee and the policy comes
with an optimum premium. It is also be extended by certain employers such as factories and 
small manufacturers to their workers under group savings linked insurance scheme. It is 
necessary for such employers to provide this group insurance. 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 84
Some advantages of a group life insurance provided by the employer are:
1. Convenience: Getting insurance cover through work is relatively easy. The paperwork is 
often part of employee data available with the employer or gathered during recruitment 
process by the HR department.
2. Price: Basic cover through employment is usually free for the employee, thereby getting a 
small amount of cover at no cost.
3. Acceptance: Most basic life insurance plans through work are underwritten at a general 
level, so even people with medical conditions are provided cover.
Some disadvantages of group life insurance through the employer generally emanate from 
the insufficiency of such covers. The basic premise of group insurance is that a large number 
of homogeneous individuals should be covered so that a small amount of life insurance benefit 
can be extended in case of unfortunate death of any one or more from such group. This is the 
reason that the premium per individual is also small which is affordable by the employer. Some 
other limitations of group life insurance are:
1. Cover is tied to employment: If the employee leaves the job, he/she is not able to take
the policy along to next employer. And if the next job does not offer group life insurance, he or 
she will have to buy an individual policy from the open market which would be much costlier 
in comparison to the group plan.
2. Low cover amounts: Cover amounts can be low in a group plan. It may be just a token 
amount when compared with the extent of liabilities left over by an employee in case of 
unfortunate death. Hence, it should not be solely relied upon as a sufficient coverage. 
Group Health Insurance
A group or corporate health insurance policy is purchased by an employer for eligible
employees of the corporate where the premium amount is borne by the employer. These
plans are designed to include and exclude members as they join and leave the company. The 
cover may be extended to the dependents of the employee as well. The corporate may be 
covering its employees to protect the health of employees and toward meeting the overall risk 
management of the corporate. The corporate gets tax benefits as well while making the 
employment attractive and morally binding on employees. It is important that the details of 
employees and his/her dependent are provided to insurer. The insurer may additionally opt to 
get some employees in higher risk categories go through a medical test with the primary 
objective to make the business viable by loading premium, if any. However, once extended by 
the insurer, the benefits accrue alike at the level of each covered employee irrespective of the 
health status. 
Group health insurance benefits the employees by way of instant query redressal, and a faster 
claim settlement. If not taken any health cover, such group plans cover an employee’s 
immediate family members credibly well. Another significant advantage is that the cover 
begins from the first day of the policy unlike the case of individual health policies.
However, group health plans provide coverage to the employees only as long as they work in 
that organization. Also, the cover amount in such plans is limited and normally the employee 
does not have a say in increasing his coverage. In case of pre-morbidities at the level of 
employee, separate health plans may be obtained to cover the concerned family members at 
risk. 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 85
Property Insurance by Building Society
Insurance for the entire building property taken by a housing cooperative society is not a 
sufficient property cover for individual members of that society. A society may take property 
insurance to restore the skeletal structure of the building in case of permanent damage. Only 
a partial cover may be eligible for limited damage to the building. However, to an occupying 
member the damage may be comprehensive in which case the cover eligible to the building 
would not be of help. Further, if the cause of damage emanates from a member’s premises 
and the damage is significant internally, the property cover to building may not be evoked at 
all. Also, the damage may extend to other movable property like furniture, gadgets, and other 
furnishing apart from the internal structure of the house which would not be covered even if 
the insurance to society property could be invoked. 
Hence, it is in the interest of a flat owner to get sufficient homeowner’s insurance that covers 
value to restore goods and furnishing to their original state in case of any damage to the 
property. Moreover, such comprehensive insurance covers also provide for rent for a 
significant period until the restoration/reconstruction of the premises which is not there in 
property cover taken by the building management. 
6-3 Provision of life insurance policy surrender – merits/demerits
Surrender of insurance policy means encashing a life insurance policy before benefits are due
to be paid, that is prior to the policy’s due maturity. A policy acquires surrender value only 
when premiums for full three years have been paid to the insurer. In the case of ULIP, one 
can stop paying the premium and collect the surrender value after five years from the start of 
the policy.
Also, not all policies will acquire surrender value. Only ULIP or endowment plans which have 
a savings component embedded will partially return the amount invested. Pure term insurance 
policies do not have savings element and they do not return anything if not renewed on timely 
basis. Surrendering a policy may be a last resort, only when an alternative sufficient life cover 
has been contracted or when the premium seems too high for the benefits entailed in the 
policy. The surrender value comes at a steep discount. Some endowment plans also have the 
provision of loans in case of need of money. In case the premium is unaffordable and the 
required period has been completed in a policy, it can be made paid-up as well to continue life 
cover besides a terminal value on surviving the term. 
Let us see some merits and demerits of surrendering insurance policy before its maturity.
Merits: 
• Life policies are taken for long term periods say 20, 30 years and it is always advisable 
to discontinue those policies which come with high premiums and fancy promises 
either in terms of bonuses or money backs at periodic intervals. Remember it is your 
money given by way of premium which is returned by the insurer as a bonus or moneyback.
• There is also not much sense in continuing with multiple policies having small sum 
assured each taken from different insurers. If you miss paying the premiums, the policy 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 86
goes into the lapsed mode and the insurer charges penalty and requires medical tests 
for revival.
Demerits:
• Loss of life cover: Surrendering a life insurance policy exposes you to the risks 
related to the uncertainties related to death and disablement. Continuing your policy 
till maturity provides continued life cover and help loved ones address financial needs 
at various stages of life in case of any unfortunate event.
• Tax benefits and regular bonuses stop: Mostly, the premiums paid towards life 
insurance policy is exempt from Income Tax under section 80C of the Income Tax Act. 
Some life insurance policies pay loyalty bonuses in the form of regular pay-outs or 
lump sum when the policy matures. Surrendering policies mid-way takes away the 
entitlement of a policyholder to these benefits.
• Beware of Surrender Charges: The insurer levies charges on the paid-up value of 
the policy at the time of its surrender, thereby reducing the total surrender value. Many 
a times these charges are significant and have a good impact on the surrender value.
6-4 Comparative evaluation of various life insurance policies
There are four broad categories of life insurance policies in India – term plan, endowment 
plan, money-back plans, and the Unit Linked Insurance Plans. In most of the term plans there 
is no money value on survival, while the endowment plans and the money-back plans have 
an embedded cash value depending on multiple factors. ULIPs are market-linked and the 
insured has the opportunity to encash the policy benefits after a minimum period of five years. 
Let us have a look at these four types of life insurance policies.
Term insurance comes at a nominal premium per lakh of sum assured depending on age and 
other factors of the insured. When seen from the point of view of covering large scale liabilities 
like a home loan, or financial goals like higher education and life-long living expenses of 
survivors, term insurance offers the required scalability for an affordable premium. As is in the 
case of liabilities, term plans are also scalable to cover the future income in case of unfortunate 
demise of the earner. The concept is human life value. They can be bought for long tenures 
of say 10, 20 or 30 years. 
Other with-profit insurance policies come with a nominal life insurance cover. It is not that they 
do not offer the kind of large covers like term plans. The per lakh sum assured charges a 
premium which is almost 10-times the premium of a term plan. These policies pay the mortality 
charges out of the premium paid and the remaining amount after deduction of administrative 
charges goes into safe investments such as bonds and government securities which yield a 
return in the end which just nudges inflation for the period of the policy. ULIP offers an 
opportunity for market linked investments and can potentially return in line with the market 
movement within the policy term. 
Endowment life insurance policies provide the combined benefit of life insurance and savings. 
The savings may look attractive on the back of tax benefits, if the annual premium stays within 
the defined range as compared to the sum assured. Such policies should be looked up to 
meet cash flows coinciding with specific financial goals like children’s higher education, 
marriage or retirement. However, as these goals come with a sufficient long tenure, the idea 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 87
of investing in these policies is belied singularly from return point of view. And they do not 
cover life sufficiently. The fact that a sum assured may look attractive when starting an 
endowment plan but on maturity the effect of inflation may take all the sheen away even after 
counting accrued bonuses and other loyalty additions. 
Money-back plans can be had to provide cashflows at regular interval of 4-5 years. They also 
come with high premiums. ULIP has a low-cost structure as compared with endowment and 
money-back policies. It has liquidity and returns aspect built into apart from tax benefits. But 
for a significant life cover, ULIPs can be an option to meet long term goals like retirement. 
They also have the flexibility of options from equity heavy to debt heavy near the goals to 
protect the value. 
6-5 Benefits and limitations in different types of non-life insurance 
policies
Three broad categories under which non-life insurance policies are issued in India are – health
insurance, motor insurance and property insurance. Let us have a look at the benefits and 
limitations individually.
Health insurance cover is taken to mitigate the financial impact of a person due to 
hospitalization in recovering against an ailment connected with specified morbidities, usually 
non-existent at the time of initial coverage, or an injury due to accident. The coverage can be 
widened to cover critical illnesses and accidental disability. Some key advantages of health 
insurance are:
• It offers financial coverage against hospitalization and medical procedures.
• One can avail cashless claim benefit ensuring that medical bills are directly settled
between the insurer and the hospital.
• Health insurance premiums enjoy income tax benefits under various sections of the
Income-tax Act, 1961.
Most health insurance plans also have a waiting period of up to 2-3 years for pre-existing 
diseases. If the person is already suffering from a health condition such as blood pressure, 
diabetes, thyroid, etc. at the time of purchasing a policy, any medical costs arising from these 
conditions will not be covered until the waiting period is over. Also, as chances of suffering 
from a health condition increase considerably with age, insurers make up for the increased 
risk by charging a higher premium.
Motor insurance policy helps in safeguarding the financial risks from driving or owning a
motor vehicle in case of an accident, theft or a vehicle breakdown. They help meet third-party 
liability in case an injury is caused to a person or a damage is inflicted on somebody’s property 
due to owning and operating the vehicle. Considerable sums may be involved in reinstating 
the vehicle condition in case of an accident. Motor insurance helps meet such expenses. It 
also helps you reclaim a portion of the car/bike’s on-road price if your vehicle is stolen, or 
salvage value if the vehicle is damaged beyond repair due to accidents.
Not having a third-party motor insurance cover is a criminal offence for the owners of the
vehicle. If you are caught driving without a valid third-party insurance cover, heavy fine may 
be imposed as per the applicable provisions under the Indian Motor Vehicle Act.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 88
Property insurance plans insure buildings, residence or commercial, toward financials in 
restoring to their original state in case of damage due to specified perils. Many such plans also 
financially safeguard the content inside the immovable property, such as erected plant and 
machinery in manufacturing facilities, expensive gadgets and air-conditioning systems in 
commercial establishments, and furniture, fixtures, durables and valuables in house property. 
The covers are against the risk of fire, burglary, flood and natural calamities such as 
earthquakes, cyclones, etc. The property insurance policies are the best option to cover the 
financial costs arising due to such risks. However, you may need to buy optional additional 
coverage or exclusive coverage for some high-value items, or face the risk of being 
underinsured.
6-6 Features of health insurance and critical illness insurance -
crucial difference
A health insurance plan covers hospitalization expenses, including bed/ICU charges, room 
rent, doctor’s fee, ambulance charges and medications administered during hospitalization. 
The reimbursed amount is only to the extent of the expenses incurred, subject to limits, subject 
further to the financial coverage afforded in the policy. 
On the other hand, a critical illness policy covers serious life-threatening ailments such as 
cancer, open heart coronary artery bypass grafting, open heart replacement/repair of valves, 
kidney failure, etc. which may require certain expensive surgical procedures to treat. The 
specific set of illnesses covered is listed in the respective health insurance policy. A good part 
in such plans is that one need not be hospitalized to make a claim. Once a person is 
diagnosed, and the situation conforms to the policy’s terms and conditions, a lump sum is paid 
to the insured.
The following chart compares the features of these two types of health plans:
Health insurance Critical illness cover
How it works? Reimburses the actual 
costs/expenses incurred 
due to hospitalization, 
subject to limits.
Pays a lump sum when diagnosed
with a critical illness – as defined 
in the policy.
What does it cover? Actual medical expenses 
incurred and billed by the 
hospital for treatment 
during hospitalization.
Provides the benefit as specified 
in the policy, does not impose limits 
of actual cost incurred or the 
hospitalization as condition.
Coverage Provided? Several illnesses are taken 
into consideration and the
coverage is widespread.
It covers only critical illnesses as
listed in the policy. 
6-7 Basic Health Insurance policy, top-up/super top-up, and floater
policy
Generally, the basic health insurance plan covers hospitalization expenses including pre- and
post-hospitalization stages, costs of medicines, doctor’s fees, diagnostic tests, etc.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 89
Regular health insurance plans come in two basic variants: Individual plans and family
floaters.
Individual plans cover one individual only up to the limit of insurance purchased. They are 
useful if a certain member in the family is at high health risk (viz. family history or some preexisting ailment or general health) which may require larger financial cover. Also, if more than 
one member is at similar high health risk, separate health insurance policies are 
recommended with individual sufficient sum assured. Such individual plans may become very 
expensive cumulatively on the family budget. 
A family floater health insurance policy aims at optimizing premium costs for a family. Such a 
policy is especially recommended if the family is relatively young and is in good state of health. 
It allows a household to avail health insurance for the entire family without needing to buy 
separate plans for each member. Generally, husband, wife, dependent children (up to a 
certain age, say 25 years) and dependent parents are allowed health cover under such floater 
plans. The premium is optimized as a lump sum assured health cover costs are eligible during 
a policy year to any one or more members, presuming that not all members would need 
medical attention requiring hospitalization at the same time (in a policy year). However, the 
family floaters are recommended as good first health insurance cover especially for a young 
family. 
If you have a health insurance policy, including a family floater, with a comparatively low sum 
assured, you can consider buying a top-up insurance plan. A top-up plan increases the 
insurance coverage over and above the existing base policy at a substantially lower cost 
compared with the base policy. It is highly recommended to go for a top-up plan with the same 
insurance company or a different insurer than increasing the sum assured in the base policy, 
which may involve a scalable premium. Such top-up plans naturally have a deductible limit up
to which the costs are borne by the base policy. For instance, a top-up health insurance policy 
of Rs 20 lakh may come in force for hospitalization in excess of Rs 10 lakh which may be 
covered in a base policy, and only costs exceeding Rs 10 lakh are eligible to be paid from a 
top-up plan. 
There are two types of top-up plans. Simple Top-up policy which allows the insured to make 
a claim that exceeds the deductible value or basic threshold limit (the sum assured of the base 
policy) during a single hospitalization. All claims are treated individually in this cover and 
multiple claims under the same policy period are not aggregated. The deductible is the limit 
set in the policy schedule.
There is one drawback in the top-up policy. It pays costs toward an ailment only once during 
the policy year. What if a recovered person develops complications again during the same 
policy year requiring further hospitalization and treatment? And what if another such disease 
strikes during the same policy year? A super top-up has answer to this problem. It pays claims 
for cumulative medical expenses of multiple hospitalizations within the same policy year of 
one or more members (in case the plan is family super top-up). Such a plan can be availed 
from any insurer and is not limited to the base policy insurer. In the long run, a super top-up 
plan is a cost-saver and offers cover for wide range of illnesses. It is especially beneficial for 
senior citizens who have frequent medical expenses that can be covered due to cumulative 
coverage.
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 90
6-8 Provisions of Keyman insurance - personal and organizational 
perspectives
As the name suggests, Keyman insurance is a life insurance cover taken by the employer on
the life of its key employee/s. The employer is the policyholder, and pays the premiums, while 
the employee is the life insured. If such an employee dies during the term of the policy, the 
employer receives the sum assured which compensates the employer for the financial loss 
suffered due to the death of its key employee. Only term insurance plan can be bought under 
a Keyman insurance. The term of the policy is matched with the outstanding period to the 
retirement of the key employee. 
A Keyman insurance policy is considered beneficial for the business as:
• The policy helps businesses face the financial loss incurred in case their key employee 
dies during the term of the policy. 
• The premium paid for a Keyman insurance policy is considered a deductible business 
expense for tax purposes.
• If the business has availed loans on the key employee’s guarantee, the death of such
an employee would result in substantial liability in the hands of the business. The policy 
proceeds of a Keyman insurance policy can help the business meet such liabilities and 
restore the confidence of creditors in the business. 
For the keyman covered by the business, there are no direct benefits. However, the following 
can be considered as positive ramifications of such an arrangement being in place:
• In addition to the life insurance, key person insurance is also available as disability 
coverage in case the individual is incapacitated and either not available to work for a 
period or no longer able to work. There are good chances that during the period of 
disability, employee’s remuneration stays intact.
• The net proceeds of the keyman insurance policy may be utilized in compensating the 
family by the business owner.
• The keyman insurance policy can be assigned by a business to the retiring keyman
and in such a case it will be considered as transfer, akin to a compensation to the 
employee and hence may be taxed in employee’s hands. It depends on the provision 
of the policy and the jurisdiction. 
There are no downsides of keyman insurance except that the premium is very high which is 
the combination of the sum sought to be assured (usually very high) and the medical profile 
and age of the keyman employee. 
6-9 Provisions of Overseas Travel Insurance 
Overseas medical insurance policy covers the medical expenses while the beneficiary is
located or based outside India. Such policies provide indemnity for expenses incurred for
medical treatment for illness, disease contracted or injury sustained during overseas travel.
Such policies cover medical expenses both as inpatient as well as outpatient for the eneficiary
while in a foreign country. Some of the plans under the Overseas Mediclaim Policy are:
• Business and Holiday Travel cover for individuals
• Study Policy for students undertaking studies abroad
• Corporate Frequent Policy for the corporate sending their executives abroad
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 91
While one can travel overseas without a medical plan, it is not advisable to take risk as one
could find mounting expenses if in case anything goes wrong. Also, there are countries such
as Germany, Japan, Netherland, USA, etc which have mandatory overseas travel insurance 
for visitors, even for short visits. The perils covered in an overseas travel insurance policy are 
medical expenses due to illness or accident, disability or accidental death, apart from such 
usual and frequently occurring irritants as lost or stolen luggage, financial loss due to flight 
delays, flight cancellations/reschedules. Some policies include limited liability coverage as 
well. One important point to remember is that the domestic health insurance will not cover for 
medical expenses incurred when travelling abroad.
6-10 Offline versus Online Insurance Policies
We live in a digital age today and a number of insurance policy seekers look online for
purchasing insurance. Some of the reasons behind the online trend are:
• Companies are able to provide online insurance policies at reduced prices since there 
is no agent or broker involved.
• At the time of buying policy online, people read the policy documents thoroughly, which 
in turn keeps them well informed of what they are about to invest in.
• Online insurance helps in comparing prices of insurance through aggregators. This
makes online insurance selection process easier.
• Buying insurance online is flexible as person is able to do so from anywhere and at 
any time.
• Purchasing an online insurance plan allows to interact with the insurer directly through 
live customer assistance to regular updates on policy premiums and renewal.
• Buying an insurance policy online eliminates the chances of a fraud, because you 
directly get it from the company.
• Buying insurance online makes the whole process paperless and all policy details are 
available online.
• In the case of online insurance policies, you have access to varied customer reviews 
about different policies.
6-11 Global coverage of insurance policies
Life insurance policies
Life Insurance policies, while being comprehensive and detailed, have a worldwide coverage. 
This means that the insurer will honour the provisions of the policy irrespective of whether the 
insured is based within India or abroad at the time of the eventuality. Effectively, the life 
insurance policy remains in force when one travels. So, if a policyholder dies while travelling 
abroad, the nominee becomes eligible to get the benefits under the policy.
Mostly, the insurers ask for a travel questionnaire to be filled by an insurance applicant. This
is to understand their risk profile. For example, insurers may decline proposals if the person
is frequently travelling to high-risk zone countries. They might demand high premium if a
person is travelling abroad to engage in high-risk or adventure sports. However, once the 
policy is issued, it is for a worldwide cover.
This also means that the existing life insurance policy in India continues when one moves
abroad as long as he or she keeps up the payments and provides accurate information about 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 92
past, current or future residency/travel plans when applying for the cover. However, there may 
be certain exclusions that apply as per policy provisions.
When deciding whether or not to continue covering you even when abroad, your insurer will 
take into account a few factors, such as:
• For how long will you be abroad? This is usually not an issue if you are only going for
a short period of time.
• where are you traveling? Some insurers will only cover you in certain countries and
other high-risk countries are excluded.
• What will you be doing while you are abroad? If you are planning to carry out any
dangerous activities, such as sky-diving, para-gliding, hot-air ballooning, water skiing, 
ice-skating, car racing, or other adventure sports involving a high risk to life, the 
insurers may refuse to cover you during your stay abroad.
Some insurers insist that you pay the premiums from an Indian bank account, and this will
mean retaining your account in India. In certain cases, some insurers may also want you to
have proof of India address which is still valid.
For raising the claim, all the documentation, including claim form, death certificate, and other 
certificates from authorities, will have to be submitted with the insurer in India. The policy sum 
is also payable only in India.
Remittance of bonus, maturity proceeds, surrender value or claims proceeds in respect of
Rupee policies, issued to foreign nationals who are not permanent residents in India, may be 
paid in Indian Rupees or may be remitted abroad, if the claimant so desires. For example, the 
NRI plans of a certain life insurer provide:
• Remittance of bonus, maturity proceeds, surrender value or claims proceeds to be
made in Indian Rupees.
• If the premium is paid in foreign currency, the remittance will be permitted only in
proportion to the premium paid in the foreign currency.
General and other non-life insurance policies
Health and Travel Insurance
To have a safe and worry-free travel, holiday or extended stay in a foreign country, it is
important that the traveller be adequately insured with a visitor insurance policy plan which
includes accident and sickness coverage with international travel insurance protection from a 
health insurance provider.
Visitors insurance plan offers the tourist with medical coverage protection during travel abroad
i.e. outside the home country of residence. In general, such a policy covers the following:
• Medical expenses for injury or sickness
• Emergency medical and health expenses
• Inpatient/outpatient surgery charges
• Prescription drugs and medication costs
• Emergency medical evacuation/ reunion
• Flight accident or Common carrier accidental coverage
• Trip Cancellation and travel interruption benefits
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 93
Marine Cargo Insurance
Marine Cargo business involves international transit and the shipment is exposed to various
risks from origin to the destination. The domestic movement or importing and exporting of
goods can expose the seller/consignor or the buyer/consignee to huge financial losses in case
shipment is damaged or lost in transit. It is crucial that the shipment is protected from various
possible perils like fire, lightening, collision between two carriers, overturning of the carrier,
etc. This type of insurance policy can be taken by sellers, buyers, import/export merchants,
contractors, banks or anyone who has an insurable interest in it. Generally, it is the
responsibility of the sellers to purchase such insurance.
It may be legal requirement as well as the export/import marine insurance fulfils the obligation
under letter of credit required by a bank. The insurance may be demanded at the port by some 
countries during import operations in order to complete import procedures. International cargo 
insurance takes the responsibility to expedite the release of cargo following the general 
average which is an internationally accepted principle.
Reinsurance - the backbone of insurance
Reinsurance helps spread the risk of loss more widely across companies and borders. It helps 
the insurance businesses who pass on the excess risk to reinsurers at affordable costs. This 
in turn helps the insured as well in the form of reduced premium.
Reinsurance is a global business. It helps increasing the risk capacity of insurers and hence 
the businesses across the world. It primarily enables the insurance companies to restrict the 
loss to their balance sheets and thus helps them to stay solvent. In doing so, insurance 
companies are able to honour all the claims related to a particular risk.
Reinsurance fulfils to primary insurance the same function as primary insurance does to its 
customers. It provides an essential service to insurance companies in spreading risk, reducing 
uncertainty and smoothing costs. Reinsurance is an integral part of worldwide insurance 
business. The largest risks that of catastrophic events cannot be adequately covered by the 
insurance industry within one national jurisdiction or even within one continent. For example, 
large conventions such as international sporting events like Olympics and various World Cup 
events have tens of billions of dollars at stake. They take place in a certain jurisdiction. 
Although the insurer of that jurisdiction may be capable of bearing the risk out of such an 
event, the local economy does not gain upon the contingent event taking place. It is imminent 
that such risks should be reinsured at a global level. 
Copyright ©2018-2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 94.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 2
India-Specific Estate Planning
FPSB Licensed Materials
Copyright © 2018-2020 Financial Planning Standards Board. All rights reserved.
This publication may not be duplicated in any way without the express written consent of the 
publisher. The information contained herein is for the personal use of the reader and may 
not be incorporated in any commercial programs, other books, databases, or any kind of 
software or any kind of electronic media including, but not limited to, any type of digital 
storage mechanism without written consent of the publisher or authors. Making copies of this 
material or any portion for any purpose other than your own is a violation of United States 
copyright laws.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 3
Table of Contents
Table of Contents 3
Preface 10
Chapter 1: Introduction to Hindu Law, Muslim Law and The Indian Succession Act, 
1925 11
Learning Objectives 11
Topics 11
1.1. Laws of Inheritance 11
1.2. Hindu Law 12
1.3. Mohammedan Law/Muslim Law 12
1.1.4.1. Indian Succession Act, 1925 - Applicability to Different Religions 13
1.4.2. Lex Situs & Lex Domicilli 13
1.4.3. Domicile of Origin 13
1.4.4. Acquisition of new domicile 14
1.4.5. Domicile of Choice and Domicile by Operation of Law 14
1.4.6. Consanguinity or Kindred 15
1.4.6.1. Lineal consanguinity 15
1.4.6.2. Collateral consanguinity 15
1.4.7. Mode of computing degree of kindred 16
Illustrations 16
1.5. Intestate Succession & Testamentary Succession 16
1.6. Wills – General Overview 17
1.7. Succession Certificates & Letters of Administration 18
Succession Certificates 18
Letters of Administration 19
1.8 Mutation and process of distribution of Estate 19
1.9. Chapter Review Questions 20
Chapter 2: Laws of Succession Based on Religion 21
Learning Objectives 21
Topics 21
2.1. The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 21
2.1.1. Principle of Propinquity (Proximity of relationship) 22
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 4
2.1.3. General rules of Succession (on priority) 22
(a). Full-blood relations are preferred over half-blood relations: 22
(b). Right of a child in womb: 23
(c). Presumption in case of simultaneous death: 23
(d). Mode of succession of two or more heirs: 23
2.1.3.1. Order of distribution of shares amongst Class I and Class II heirs 23
2.1.3.2. Distribution of shares between heirs in Class I and Class II 24
2.1.3.3. Order of succession among ‘agnates’ and ‘cognates’ 24
2.1.3.4. Blood relationships (Full Blood, Half Blood, Uterine Blood) 25
2.2. Hindu Undivided Family, Ancestral and Self-Acquired Property 25
2.2.1. Hindu Undivided Family 25
2.2.2. Constituents of a HUF 26
Coparceners 26
Karta 26
2.2.3. Types of Property under Uncodified Hindu Law 26
Ancestral Property 26
Joint Family Property 26
Self-acquired Property 26
Nature of Ancestral Property & Self-acquired Property 27
2.3. Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 27
2.4. The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 (Sharia Act) 28
2.4.1. Primary Sources of Muslim Law in India 28
2.4.2. Bequest of property by will (Wasiyatnama) 29
2.4.3. Requirement of consent in case of bequest of one-third of property 29
2.4.4. Bequest of property where a testator has no heirs 29
2.4.5. Manner of abatement of legacy in case bequest exceeds one-third without 
consent of heirs 30
2.4.6. Bequest to a child in womb is valid 30
2.4.7. Bequest of property to an heir causing the testator's death 30
2.5. Chapter Review Questions 30
Chapter 3: Salient Features of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 in Testamentary and 
Intestate Succession 31
Learning Objectives 32
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 5
Topics 32
3.1. Introduction 32
3.2. Definitions 33
Will 33
Testator 33
Legatee 33
Codicil 33
Executor 33
Administrator 33
Probate 33
Letters of Administration 34
Minor 34
3.3. Applicability of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 34
Succession for Hindus 34
Succession for Muslims 34
Succession for Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists 34
Succession for Christians, Parsis and Jews 34
3.4.1. Persons capable of making a Will 34
General Principles 35
Illustrations 35
3.4.2. Animus testandi 36
3.4.3. Lapse of Legacy 36
Illustrations 36
3.4.4. Bequest made to a class of persons 36
Illustrations 37
3.4.5. Rule against perpetuity 37
Illustrations 37
3.4.6. Onerous, Independent & Contingent Bequests 37
Onerous Bequests 37
Illustration 38
Independent Bequests 38
Illustration 38
Contingent Bequests 38
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 6
Illustrations 38
3.4.7. Specific & Demonstrative Legacy 38
Specific Legacy 38
Illustrations 39
Demonstrative Legacy 39
Illustrations 39
Order of payment when legacy directed to be paid out of fund the subject of 
Specific Legacy 39
Illustration 39
3.5.1. General Rules of Intestacy 40
3.5.2. Rules specific to Parsis dying Intestate 40
3.6. Chapter Review Questions 41
Chapter 4: Types of Wills & Requirements of a Valid Will 41
Learning Objectives 42
Topics 42
4.1. Introduction 42
4.2. Classification of Wills 43
Privileged Will 43
Unprivileged Will 43
4.3. Types of Unprivileged Wills 43
4.3.1. Contingent Will 43
4.3.2. Concurrent Will 44
4.3.3. Mutual Wills & Joint Wills 44
Mutual Will 44
Joint Will 44
4.3.4. Holograph Will 45
4.3.5. Duplicate Will 45
4.4. Requirements of a valid Will 45
4.5. Duly and validly executed Will 46
4.6. Attestation 47
4.7. Appointment of an Executor 48
4.8. Amending a Will 49
Codicils 49
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 7
New Will 50
4.9. Chapter Review Questions 50
Chapter 5: Administration of an Estate 51
Learning Objectives 51
Topics 51
5.1. The Executor – Legal representative in a fiduciary capacity 51
5.2. Powers of an Executor or Administrator 52
5.3. Duties, Role and Responsibilities of Executors and Administrators under 
the Indian Succession Act, 1925 53
5.3.1. Aggregate inventory of estate and assessed value 53
5.3.2.1. Probate – Definition 54
5.3.2.2. Importance and Applicability of a Probate 54
5.3.2.3. Obtaining a Probate 54
5.3.3. Establish solvency of the estate, pay expenses, pay off debt on priority
55
5.3.4. Ancillary Duties & Responsibilities of an Executor or Administrator 56
5.4. Chapter Review Questions 56
Chapter 6: Tenancy-in-Common and Joint Tenancy, Transmission & Nomination 57
Learning Objectives 57
Topics 57
6.1. Tenants-in-Common and Joint Tenancy 57
Tenancy in common 58
Joint-tenancy 58
6.2. Contracts- Holding on any/either or survivor basis in bank accounts, 
mutual funds and securities 59
6.2.1. Bank Accounts 59
Either or Survivor 59
Anyone or Survivor 59
Former or Survivor 59
Latter or Survivor 60
Jointly Held Account 60
Jointly or Survivor 60
Minor’s Account 60
Comparative Table of modes of Operation 60
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 8
6.2.2. Mutual Funds 61
6.2.3. Securities 61
6.3. Nomination in Life Insurance Policies 62
6.4. Nomination in Housing Societies 63
6.5. Married Women’s Property Act and Estate Planning 63
6.6 Other Tools for Estate Planning – Power of Attorney 64
6.6.1. Powers of Attorney, its use and purpose 64
6.6.2. Types of Power of Attorney - general and special 64
6.6.3. Revocation of PoA 64
6.6.4. Limitations of PoA holder 65
6.6.5 PoA executed abroad 66
6.7. Chapter Review Questions 66
Chapter 7: Gifts, Trusts & Family Arrangements in Estate Planning 66
Learning Objectives 67
Topics 67
7.1. Gifts 67
Other Matters Related To Gifts 68
7.1.1. Inheritance Tax 68
7.1.2. Tax on Gifts 69
7.1.2.1. Movable Property – Fair Market Value 69
Determination of FMV for inventory as per the Income Tax Rules 70
7.1.2.2. Immovable Property – Stamp Duty 70
Stamp Duty implications on a Gift 71
7.2. The Indian Trusts Act, 1882 71
7.2.1. Definitions 71
Author/Settlor 71
Trustee 71
Protector 72
Beneficiary 72
Trust Property 72
Trust Deed 72
7.2.2. Types of Trusts 772
7.2.2.1. Testamentary & Non-Testamentary Trusts 72
7.2.2.2. Public, Charitable or Religious Trusts & Private Trusts 73
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 9
Public Trust 73
Private Trust 73
7.2.2.3. Revocable & Irrevocable Trusts 73
Revocable Trust 73
Irrevocable Trust 73
7.2.2.4. Non-Discretionary & Discretionary Trusts 73
Non-Discretionary Trusts 73
Discretionary Trust 733
Other Trusts 74
7.3. Advantages of Private Trusts 74
7.3.1. Planning succession 74
7.3.2. Ring fencing assets 74
7.3.3. Tax planning 74
7.3.4. Protecting persons with special needs 74
7.3.5. Flexibility 75
7.3.6. Transparency in management 75
7.3.7. Strategic objectives 75
7.3.8 Trust as a pass-through entity 75
7.4. Exception – HUF property 76
7.5. Succession planning for small businesses 76
7.6. Business Succession 76
7.7. Offshore Trusts 77
7.8. Family Arrangements 78
7.9. Chapter Review Questions 79
Answers to Chapter Review Questions 790
Chapter 1 800
Chapter 2 81
Chapter 3 82
Chapter 4 82
Chapter 5 84
Chapter 6 85
Chapter 7 85
Disclaimer 87
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 10
Preface
Estate or succession planning is relevant in the complex world we live in. There is a 
growing interest in safeguarding assets and structuring succession. To effectively service 
clients’ needs and your objectives, as financial planners, it is necessary to understand and 
approach estate planning in a structured fashion, and assess the diverse factors involved, 
including estate value and composition, family dynamics, tax benefits and governing law. 
Generally, people are reticent about planning succession. However, with a new found 
awareness of the need to pre-empt and avoid disputes, this view is slowly changing. An 
unplanned succession can lead to lengthy disputes and litigation, which is time consuming, 
costly, and, typically, the estate is tied up, sometimes for decades, until settlement is achieved 
or the proceedings finally adjudicated. 
A financial planner should holistically advise clients on the options available while 
being cognizant of legal framework. An overall understanding of the law surrounding
succession planning is therefore necessary.
The law encompassing succession has evolved considerably due to India’s diverse 
multi-cultural population. As India does not have a unified civil code governing all faiths, there 
was a need for codification of religious laws governing succession. The first statute governing 
succession was the Indian Succession Act, 1865 (repealed) (based on English Law) but it 
excluded all native Indians due to the extent of exceptions contained therein, although the 
Hindu Wills Act, 1870 brought all wills and codicils made by Hindus under its ambit. 
Subsequently, the Probate and Administration Act, 1881 was made applicable to both Hindus 
and Muslims. In view of multiple statutes and personal laws governing religious groups, 
including the Indian Succession Act, 1865, Hindu Wills Act, 1870, Probate and Administration 
Act, 1881, Parsi Intestate Succession Act, 1865, Succession Certificate Act, 1889, etc., the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925 (ISA) was ultimately enacted to bring about uniformity and for 
consolidating the law on succession. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 11
Chapter 1: Introduction to Hindu Law, 
Muslim Law and The Indian Succession 
Act, 1925
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
1-1 Understand the legal structure of estate and succession planning in India.
1-2 Understand the key principles under the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
1-3 Understand the law governing succession of individuals based on religion.
Topics
1.1. Laws of Inheritance
1.2. Hindu Law
1.3. Mohammedan Law/Muslim Law
1.4.1 Indian Succession Act, 1925 – Applicability to Different Religions
1.4.2. Lex Situs & Lex Domicilli
1.4.3. Domicile of Origin
1.4.4. Acquisition of new domicile 
1.4.5. Domicile of Choice and Domicile by Operation of Law 
1.4.6. Consanguinity or Kindred
1.4.6.1. Lineal Consanguinity
1.4.6.2. Collateral Consanguinity
1.4.7. Mode of computing of degree of kindred
1.5. Intestate Succession & Testamentary Succession
1.6. Wills – General Overview
1.7. Succession Certificates & Letters of Administration
1.8. Mutation and process of distribution of Estate
1.9. Chapter Review Questions
1.1. Laws of Inheritance 
The extent of inter and intra religious diversity in India poses a significant challenge in 
implementing a uniform civil code as religious communities follow their own personal laws in 
matters relating to marriage, divorce, succession etc. Personal law is generally defined as a 
law that applies to a certain class or group of people or a particular person, based on religion, 
faith, and culture. The laws of succession in India are complex, multi-layered, diverse, and 
dependant on the personal laws of the deceased, which, in turn, is typically based on religion.
The three laws of succession in India are:
(a). Hindu Succession Act, 1956 which governs the Hindus, Jains, Sikhs and 
Buddhists;
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 12
(b). The Mohammedan Law, which is an uncodified law mainly based the principles 
of Shariat governing Muslims; 
(c). The ISA, which applies to Parsis, Indian Christians and persons married under 
the Special Marriages Act, 1954. 
This Chapter will discuss the above laws.
1.2. Hindu Law 
The Hindu Succession Act, 1965 (HSA), came into force on 17th June, 1956, and 
amended and codified the law relating to intestate succession amongst Hindus. It contains the 
entire law of inheritance applicable to Hindus, Sikhs, Jains and Buddhists. It also provides for 
devolution of property with respect to two main schools of Hindu law, that is, Mitakshara and 
Dayabhaga, as well as classes of heirs, devolution of property on the respective classes, 
disqualification of heirs, and failures. 
With the introduction of the 2005 Amendment Act (as defined hereinbelow in Chapter 
2) the law was radically changed by abolishing the concept of a limited estate of Hindu women, 
and by giving them the absolute right to deal and dispose of their self-acquired property. 
HSA is dealt with in greater detail in Chapter 2.
1.3. Mohammedan Law/Muslim Law
Mohammedan personal law is uncodified and based on the principles of Shariat, being
the commandments of Allah. It is multi-layered, highly nuanced, complex, and applies 
differently to different factions of Muslims. As it has been developing since time immemorial, 
there are numerous sources of law that have modified its development.
Broadly, there are two schools of Mohammedan law, based upon the sects formed 
after the death of the Prophet Mohammed, being:
(a). the Sunni school, which relies on the Sunnah, a record of the teachings of the 
Prophet, which is further subdivided into four schools i.e. Hanafi, Maliki, Shafii, and 
Hanbali. This school follows the personal law known as ‘Sunni law’; and,
(b). the Shia school, which relies on ayatollahs or religious leaders' interpretations 
of the Prophet's teachings, distinct from the Sunni school owing to interpretive 
differences. This school follows the personal law known as ‘Shia law’.
The Shariat lays down a code of obligations, and hence Mohammedan personal law 
encompasses spiritual, religious, legal and social teachings and guidance, as well as the law 
applicable to marriage, dower, divorce, maintenance, Wakfs, testamentary succession, 
inheritance or non-testamentary succession, etc.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 13
The laws of inheritance principally lay down the property that is heritable, the class of 
heirs, shares of heirs, principles to be followed for the devolution of properties and how the 
law will be applicable for different schools of law. 
Mohammedan law is dealt with in greater detail in Chapter 2.
1.1.4.1. Indian Succession Act, 1925 - Applicability to Different 
Religions 
ISA largely governs the succession laws applicable to Parsis and Indian Christians. It 
also governs the testamentary succession of Hindus and applies to persons married under 
the Special Marriages Act, 1954. 
Part V deals with intestate succession. Chapter II, from sections 31 to 35 sets out rules 
for intestates other than Parsis, that is, largely Indian Christians, and governs, amongst other 
things, devolution of property and rights of a widower. Chapter III prescribes special rules for 
Parsis that die intestate under sections 50 to 56 and sets out, amongst other things, general 
principles relating to intestate succession and division of the deceased’s property among 
different heirs. 
These provisions are dealt with in greater detail in Chapter 3. Certain governing 
principles as envisaged by the ISA are as follows:
1.4.2. Lex Situs & Lex Domicilli
Under the ISA, the devolution of the deceased’s estate is based on two established 
English principles: 
Lex Situs or law of the place where a property is situated, governs the immovable 
properties in a deceased’s estate, under section 5(1), which provides that any immovable 
property of a person who has died intestate (that is, not leaving a will or testamentary 
instrument), will be regulated by the laws of India regardless of domicile at death.
Lex Domicilli or law of domicile, under section 5(2), which provides that moveable 
property of a person who has died intestate will be regulated by the law of the country in which 
the deceased was domiciled at death. 
1.4.3. Domicile of Origin
Domicile and residence are an important first step in succession and estate planning. 
Residence of a person is relevant to determine income tax liabilities, and domicile is relevant 
in the context of non-tax considerations such as succession. The concept of residence is 
based on a minimum number of days that the (tax) assesse must be in a country to qualify as 
its resident. Domicile, however is a concept that captures both physical presence and intention 
to stay within territorial limits. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 14
Domicile is defined as the country that a person treats as their permanent home, or 
lives in and has a substantial connection with1
. It is important to understand domicile, in order 
to effectively plan a person’s estate, owing particularly to cross border ramifications. As stated 
above, moveable property is based on domicile at the time of death. Therefore, moveable 
property of persons domiciled in India at death will be subject to Indian law. 
The ISA lays down general principles of domicile. Section 6 provides that a person 
may have only one domicile for succession. The ISA also enlists three types of domicile, being, 
domicile of origin, domicile by choice and domicile by operation of law.
Sections 7 to 9 deal with Domicile of Origin and provides that such domicile of every 
legitimate child is the country where the father was domiciled at the time of birth of the child. 
In the case of an illegitimate child, the domicile of origin is the country where the mother was 
domiciled at the time of birth. Under section 9, the domicile of origin will prevail until a new 
domicile is acquired.
1.4.4. Acquisition of new domicile
Under section 10 a person will be deemed to acquire a new domicile by taking up fixed 
habitation in a country that is not the domicile of origin. The term ‘fixed habitation’ is not 
defined; however, it is generally understood as an intention to acquire a new domicile, which 
is acquired by ‘taking up fixed habitation’ in a country other than the domicile of origin. 
In Central Bank vs. Ram Narain2
, the Supreme Court held that the domicile of origin 
remains constant even if the individual leaves the country with the intention of never returning 
till the person acquires domicile elsewhere. This was further elaborated in Dr. Yogesh 
Bharadwaj vs. State of Uttar Pradesh3
in which the Supreme Court observed that domicile of 
origin cannot be “shaken off easily”. Therefore, unless a certain intention to permanently reside 
elsewhere is proved, the domicile of origin continues.
1.4.5. Domicile of Choice and Domicile by Operation of Law
Generally, it is presumed that a domicile of origin will continue, until it is established 
that a person has given it up by residing elsewhere with the intention of never returning. 
Therefore, there must be a combination of both residence and intention to reside permanently 
or for an unlimited period. In Kedar Pandey vs. Narain Bikram Shah4
, the Supreme Court held 
that the burden of proof to establish that a person has acquired a domicile of choice is on the 
person asserting it. It is important to understand that business connections or ownership of 
assets elsewhere will not exclusively evidence domicile of choice.
While domicile of choice is dealt by section 10, section 11 sets out a special mode of 
acquiring domicile, that is, if a person has been a resident of India for at least year and wants 
1 Oxford Dictionary
2 AIR 1955 SC 36
3 AIR 1991 SC 356
4 AIR 1966 SC 10
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 15
to be domiciled in India, a declaration in writing stating the desire and intent of acquiring such 
domicile must be submitted to the relevant government office.
Sections 14 to 18 deal with domicile by operation of law, and with the object of 
determining the domicile of dependants, such as minors and married women, that is, persons 
whose domicile is dependent on and changes with the domicile of another person in law. 
These provisions cover three categories of dependants; minors, married women and lunatics 
or persons with unsound mind.
Summing up, for ascertaining domicile, the rules above should be considered, along 
with the determination of whether the domicile of origin has been overridden by domicile of 
choice. 
1.4.6. Consanguinity or Kindred
Part IV of the ISA, dealing with consanguinity, does not apply to intestate or 
testamentary succession to the property of a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, Jaina or 
Parsi, who are each governed by personal law.
Consanguinity or kindred relationship, per section 24, means “the connection or 
relation of persons descended from the same or common ancestor”.
Consanguinity is of two types: (i) lineal and (ii) collateral.
1.4.6.1. Lineal consanguinity 
Lineal consanguinity, defined in section 25, is the relationship between two persons 
who are directly ascendant or descendent from the other, such as parent-child, grandparentgrandchild and so forth. When computing lineal consanguinity, every generation, whether 
ascending or descending, constitutes one degree. For example, a parent-child are related to 
each other in the first degree, there being one generation separating them. Grandparentgrandchild are accordingly related in the second degree.
1.4.6.2. Collateral consanguinity
Collateral consanguinity, defined in section 26, is a relationship between persons 
having a common ancestor, but not directly ascending or descending from each other. 
Examples are, siblings ascending from the same parents and cousins who ascend from a 
common grandfather.
While Schedule I contains a table for computing degrees of kindred, that determines 
the manner in which/upon whom property will devolve, section 27 contains the following 
important rules for determining succession:
(a). there is no distinction between those related to the deceased through their 
father or mother i.e. relatives on paternal and maternal sides (of the same degree). 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 16
(b). no distinction is made between half blood and full blood relatives (of the same 
degree).
(c). an unborn child subsequently born alive, if conceived at the time of the death 
of the deceased, is treated as alive / there is no distinction between a child who was 
conceived (but subsequently born alive) at the time of death of the deceased and a 
child who was born during the lifetime of the deceased.
1.4.7. Mode of computing degree of kindred
Part IV and Schedule I computes the degree of kindred or consanguinity separately for 
lineal and collateral consanguinity.
Lineal consanguinity: Under section 25(2), for the purpose of ascertaining in what degree of 
kindred a lineal relative stands to the deceased, every generation, whether ascending or 
descending, constitutes a degree. This has been dealt with above.
Collateral consanguinity: Under section 26(2), for ascertaining in what degree of kindred any 
collateral relative stands to the deceased, it is necessary to reckon upwards from the 
deceased to the common stock and downwards to the collateral relative, a degree being 
allowed for each person, both ascending and descending.
While Schedule I contains a table of consanguinity and computations for determining 
the degrees of kindred, for computation of degrees of collateral relatives, one must begin from 
the person whose relatives are to be reckoned, moving upwards to the common ancestor, or 
downwards to the collateral relative. Thus, the computation is a sum of the degree in which 
the common ancestor stands from such relative in addition to the degree in which the common 
ancestor stands from the deceased.
For example, for ascertaining the degree of kindred of a brother, the degree will be 
computed by reckoning upwards from the deceased to the common ancestor, that is, the 
father, related in the first degree to the deceased, and then to the brother who is related to the 
father in the first degree. Therefore, the brother will stand related to the deceased in the 
second degree.
Illustrations
A and B are brothers having the same father X. A is related to X in the first degree, 
and X is also related to B in the first degree. Therefore, there are two degrees between A and 
B, and A is related to B in the second degree.
C and D are cousins having the same paternal grandfather Z. C is related to Z in the 
second degree, and Z is also related to his grandson D in the second degree. Therefore, there 
are four degrees between C and D, and C is related to D in the fourth degree.
1.5. Intestate Succession & Testamentary Succession
The Oxford dictionary defines an ‘intestate’ as ‘A person who has died without having 
made a will’. Therefore, intestate succession typically connotes the law of inheritance or 
succession applicable upon the death of a person who has not left a will. Other than in the 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 17
case of a Hindu, Mohammedan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain, a deceased intestate’s assets will be 
distributed in accordance with the ISA. For Hindu and Muslim intestates, vesting takes place 
in terms of their personal laws. This will be discussed later.
While the dictionary definition has a wider import, section 30 provides specifically that, 
‘A person is deemed to die intestate in respect of all property of which he has not made a 
testamentary disposition which he is capable of taking effect.’ Hence, a person would be 
deemed to have died intestate when there is no will, or when there are assets that are not 
dealt with in the will of the deceased. The former is known as total intestacy and the latter as 
partial intestacy. 
Accordingly, where assets are excluded from a will, the laws of intestate succession 
will apply to them and they will devolve accordingly. It is, however, important to understand 
that if the will contains a general, or residuary (catch all) bequest of all other assets, it would 
not be a case of partial intestacy, as, effectively, all assets are dealt with.
Intestate succession often leads to disputes, as the distribution of the deceased’s 
estate is governed entirely by the relevant law of inheritance, without any flexibility, unless a 
mutual agreement is arrived between the sharers of the estate.
Moving to testamentary succession, a will is the most common and basic instrument 
articulating and apportioning the devolution of an estate on death. A ‘Will’, under section 2(h), 
is a legal declaration of the intention of a testator with respect to his property which he desires 
to be carried into effect after his death. When making one, the following key factors are 
necessary to keep in mind:
(a). a will should be clear, describe, in detail, the estate, contain unambiguous 
bequests, and also provide for alternate bequests in case primary bequests fail or are 
invalid; 
(b). it should contain a residuary provision to cover any part of the estate that is not 
dealt with specifically;
(c). although not mandatory to name an executor, it is advisable that one is 
appointed. 
(d). an ‘In-Terrorem’ provision is sometimes prudent to incorporate. It provides that 
if a beneficiary challenges the will and/or any of the bequests made therein, such 
person will lose all benefits under the will. While this does not restrict a beneficiary 
from legally challenging a will, it can be an efficient deterrent. 
1.6. Wills – General Overview
A will is always susceptible to challenge and therefore it is necessary that the following 
conditions are met:
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 18
(a). the author of a will should be of sound mind and attained the age of majority. 
(Section 59);
(b). the will should be in writing and executed before two witnesses who should 
each attest the will, all in each other’s presence. (Section 63).
Wills do not require compulsory registration or safe-custody, under the Indian 
Registration Act, 1908 (Registration Act). Even if registered, or deposited in safe-custody, 
there will be no presumption of correctness or validity, that is, a will may be challenged5
.
A will may be declared void if it is:
(a). made by a person who is of unsound mind or a minor (Section 59)
(b). obtained by fraud, coercion, or importunity (Section 61)
(c). a privileged will and the survives beyond a month from making it. (Section 
66(h))
(d). not expressive of any definite intention or is void for uncertainty. (Section 89)
A void bequest does not usually invalidate the will. Therefore, in certain cases a will 
remains valid, while a bequest therein is void. A few examples of void bequests are given 
below:
(a). a gift to an attesting witness of the will (Section 67) 
(b). a bequest not expressive of any definite intention, being void for uncertainty. 
(Section 89)
(c). a bequest to a person not in existence at the time of the testator’s death. 
(Section 112)
(d). a bequest of a life interest (not absolute interest) to an unborn person (Section 
113).
(e). a bequest infringing the rule against perpetuity. (Section 114)
(f). a bequest made with respect to a prior void bequest. (Section 116)
(g). a bequest made upon an impossible condition (Section 126)
(h). a bequest based upon immoral or illegal conditions (Section 127)
1.7. Succession Certificates & Letters of Administration
Succession Certificates 
A succession certificate is a certificate issued by a court of jurisdiction, usually a District 
Court, to legal heirs, and confers authority to inherit debts, securities and other movable 
assets. 
Under section 373, a succession certificate will be granted if the court decides that the 
petitioner has the right, and best title, to the assets in question. A succession certificate will 
5 Section 18 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 19
specify the debts and securities contained in the petition, and may authorize the holder to 
either receive interest/dividends or to negotiate/transfer securities, or both.
Succession Certificates are essential to prove the entitlement of an heir claiming 
inheritance, and, in some states required to transfer title of immovable property along with a 
probate. In some states, however, only a probated will is necessary. 
A succession certificate may be granted, on a petition filed, to a person of sound mind, 
not being a minor and having interest in the property. 
Letters of Administration
Letters of Administration are granted to a person (known as an Administrator) by a 
competent court, or probate registry, in respect of the entire estate of a deceased in the 
following circumstances:
(a). there is no will or testamentary instrument, or
(b). there is a will but an executor has not been appointed, or
(c). the executor named in a will refuses to act, or
(d). the executor named in a will dies.
In determining who should be appointed as administrator, preference is given firstly to 
the widow or widower, followed by persons beneficially entitled to the estate, and failing which 
to petitioning creditor(s). Under section 293, letters of administration cannot be granted before 
fourteen days from the date of the death of the intestate.
On appointment, the administrator is required to collect the estate, pay lawful debts of 
the estate and deal with and distribute the estate in accordance with the law of succession 
that governs the deceased. 
1.8. Mutation and process of distribution of Estate
Any change of title ownership of an immovable property (plot of land, flat, house, bungalow
etc.) from one person to another when the subject property is sold or transferred is referred to 
as Mutation. By mutating a property, the new owner gets the property recorded in his name in 
the concerned government authority’s revenue records.
Mutation is considered a vital document in case of ownership related to land. For example, if 
an agricultural land is acquired by the government and the registry of the land is in the name 
of ‘A’ while mutation is in favor of ‘B’, the government will release the acquisition funds in 
favour of ‘B’, as in the revenue records ‘B’ is recorded as the owner of the land.
Mandatory documents required for mutation are:
• Sale Deed copy
• Application for mutation with court fee stamp affixed on it
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 20
• Indemnity bond on stamp paper of requisite value
• Affidavit on stamp paper of requisite value
• Receipt of up-to-date property tax payment
In case of inheritance or Will the documents required are:
• Death Certificate
• Copy of Will or Succession Certificate
• Indemnity bond on stamp paper of requisite value
• Affidavit on stamp paper of requisite value attested by a Notary
• Receipt of up-to-date property tax payment in case of Power of Attorney
• Copy of Power of Attorney
• Copy of Will
• Receipt for payment registered with a sub-registrar
• Application for mutation with court fee stamp affixed on it
It is worthwhile to periodically check for details regarding mutation as it helps to find if any
illegal transaction has been carried out on the property.
1.9. Chapter Review Questions
1. What are the different types of succession?
2. What are the types of domiciles? 
3. Can a person have more than one domicile?
4. What are the original domiciles of a legitimate child and illegitimate child?
5. What is the principal difference between lineal and collateral consanguinity?
6. When is a person said to have died intestate?
7. Can a part of will be void?
8. How is movable and immovable property of an intestate dealt with?
9. What is a succession certificate? 
10. What is the preferred order considered while appointing an administrator under Letters 
of Administration?
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 21
Chapter 2: Laws of Succession Based on 
Religion
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
2-1 Understand the applicability of succession laws based on religion of a person.
2-2 Understand basic principles of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and Mohammedan Law.
Topics
2.1. The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 
2.1.1. Principle of Propinquity (proximity of relationship)
2.1.2. General rules of Succession (on priority)
2.1.3.1. Order of distribution of shares among Class I and Class II heirs
2.1.3.2. Distribution of shares between heirs in Class I and Class II 
2.1.3.3. Order of succession among ‘agnates’ and ‘cognates’
2.1.3.4. Blood relationships (Full Blood, Half Blood, Uterine Blood)
2.2. Hindu Undivided Family, Ancestral and Self-Acquired property
2.2.1. Hindu Undivided Family
2.2.2. Constituents of a HUF
2.2.3. Types of Property under Uncodified Hindu Law
2.3. Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005
2.4. The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 
2.4.1. Primary Sources of Muslim law in India 
2.4.2. Bequest of property by will (Wasiyatnama)
2.4.3. Requirement of consent in case of bequest of one-third of property
2.4.4. Bequest of property where testator has no heirs
2.4.5. Manner of abatement of legacy in case bequest exceeds one-third without consent of 
heirs.
2.4.6. Bequest to a child in womb is valid
2.4.7. Bequest of property to an heir causing the testator’s death
2.5. Chapter Review Questions
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 22
2.1. The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 
HSA applies to, and governs the intestate succession of:
(a). a person who is Hindu by religion, in any of its developments or forms, a 
follower of Prarthana, Brahmo or Arya Samaj;
(b). a person who is Sikh or Buddhist by religion; and
(c). to any person who is not a Christian, Muslim, Jew, or Parsi by religion. 
It is not retrospective, and does not affect the succession relating to a Hindu who died 
before 17th June, 1956. It also excludes property owned by Hindus who married under the 
Special Marriages Act, 1954. In the above cases, matters of succession would be governed 
by the ISA.
2.1.1. Principle of Propinquity (Proximity of relationship)
Succession under the HSA is based on the Mitakshara school, a legal treatise on 
inheritance. The principle of propinquity, meaning in order of nearness of blood relation, that 
is, nearest degree of blood relation forms the basis of succession. 
The allocation of the parental property was originally allocated on the rule of 
possession by birth which meant that the sons of the family had exclusive right by birth in the 
property of the joint family, while daughters held no such rights. This rule of allocation was 
known as the doctrine of survivorship. 
When a Hindu dies intestate, this principle of propinquity is used to determine 
distribution amongst heirs, where preference of heirs is based upon the proximity of their 
relationship to the deceased. The principle of propinquity signifies the right by which an heir 
may take possession of the estate. 
2.1.3. General rules of Succession (on priority)
General rules governing the rights of heirs in respect of an estate are based on the 
basis of proximity of their relationship with the deceased. Enumerated below are a few general 
rues:
(a). Full-blood relations are preferred over half-blood relations: 
The relationships of heirs are divided in different categories, depending upon the 
closeness of relationship between the two. Section 2(e) defines “full blood”, “half blood” and 
“uterine blood” as follows: 
“(2)(e) "full blood", "half blood" and "uterine blood"—
(i) two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood when they are 
descended from a common ancestor by the same wife, and by half blood when they 
are descended from a common ancestor but by different wives; 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 23
(ii) two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood when they are 
descended from a common ancestress but by different husbands; 
Explanation - In this clause "ancestor" includes the father and "ancestress" the mother.
This is to be read with section 18, which provides that heirs related by full blood are preferred 
to heirs related by half-blood when determining devolution of property.
(b). Right of a child in womb: 
Under section 20, a child in a mother’s womb at the time of the death of the father has 
the right to inherit property as if the child was born before his death. The child’s share will thus 
be reserved till birth. 
(c). Presumption in case of simultaneous death: 
Section 21 lays down an artificial rule of presumption based on age in cases where 
two persons have died making it impossible to know who survived or who died first. In such a 
case, the presumption in law is that the younger survives the elder. 
(d). Mode of succession of two or more heirs:
Section 19 sets out a rule to govern succession in case property devolves upon two or 
more heirs. In such a case, heirs will take the property per capita and not per stirpes, that is, 
each heir will be entitled to their own equal share. 
It is important to note that in a distribution per stirpes (which means “by representation”) 
property is divided according to class of heirs or equally amongst each branch of the family. 
Further, heirs will take the property as tenants-in-common and not joint-tenants, that 
is, the property does not revert to one in case the other dies. Section 19 deals with the legal 
concept of tenants-in-common and joint-tenants. Acquiring and holding property as tenantsin-common means that on death, the deceased’s share will devolve upon the heirs of the 
deceased. In case of a joint-tenancy, the deceased’s share will devolve upon the other joint 
tenants, and not to heirs
2.1.3.1. Order of distribution of shares amongst Class I and Class II heirs
Section 8 provides that when a Hindu male dies intestate, his property will be 
distributed amongst his heirs on the basis of the class of heirs they belong to, as specified by 
the Schedule contained in the HSA. Each class excludes the other, that is, if there are heirs 
in one class, the property will devolve entirely upon them, to the exclusion of the other classes. 
Accordingly:
(a). property will first devolve upon Class I heirs. Class I heirs are known as 
‘preferential heirs’. Class I heirs include sons, daughters and the widow;
(b). if there are no Class I heirs, the property will devolve upon Class II heirs. Class 
II heirs include brother(s) of the deceased and sister(s) of the deceased. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 24
(c). if there are no Class II heirs the property will devolve upon agnates. Agnates 
include a deceased’s son’s son, a deceased’s father’s brother’s widow and a 
deceased’s father’s brother’s daughter; and, 
(d). if there are no agnates, property will devolve upon cognates. Cognates include 
a deceased’s daughter’s children and a deceased’s son’s daughter’s children. 
This hierarchy above stems directly from the principle of propinquity. 
Section 9 specifies the order of succession amongst heirs in the schedule and also 
belonging to each class. It specifies that: (i) Class I heirs will inherit their respective shares 
simultaneously and to the exclusion of all others, (ii) Class II heirs will inherit according to their 
position as specified by the entries of the schedule. Class II is also divided into nine subsections or entries, each containing several groups of heirs. For example, the heirs specified 
in Entry I of Class II will be preferred over those in Entry II. 
2.1.3.2. Distribution of shares between heirs in Class I and Class II 
Although Class I heirs inherit their share of the property simultaneously their shares 
are not equal. Section 10 sets out rules for the distribution of such share amongst Class I 
heirs, which are as follows:
Rule 1- The widow of the deceased (or if there are more than one widow, all widows together) 
take one share.
Rule 2- The surviving sons and daughters and the mother of deceased each take one share.
Rule 3- The heirs of each pre-deceased son or each pre-deceased daughter of the deceased 
take one share jointly.
Rule 4 – This elaborates on Rule 3 and provides that in case of a pre-deceased son’s heirs, 
shares will be taken in equal proportion by the widow(s) and sons and daughters. In case of a 
pre-deceased daughter’s heirs, the shares are to be taken in equal proportion by her sons and 
daughters; her husband being excluded.
As far as Class II heirs, section 11 provides that all heirs mentioned in the same entry 
will receive the same proportion of shares. For example, as both, brother and sister of the 
deceased fall under Entry II of Class II, they will inherit the property in the same proportion.
Sections 8,9,10 and 11 and their rules, must be read with section 19, that is, if two or 
more heirs receive the same property together then, they will take it per capita and as tenantsin-common (referred above). 
2.1.3.3. Order of succession among ‘agnates’ and ‘cognates’
As stated above, in the absence of Class I and Class II heirs, agnates will inherit, and 
in their absence, cognates will inherit. Under section 2(a) a person is an “agnate” of another 
person if the two are related by blood or adoption wholly by males. For example, a deceased’s 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 25
son’s son will be an agnate. Under section 2(c) a person is a “cognate” of another person if 
the two are related by blood or adoption but not wholly through males. For example, a 
deceased’s father’s sister’s son will be a cognate. 
Section 12, provides three rules of preference to determine the order of succession 
amongst agnates and cognates, that is:
(a). Rule 1 - Between heirs who claim to be descendants of a male deceased, the 
heir that is related by a nearer line to the deceased is preferred to the one from a 
remote line. For example, agnates classified as the deceased’s son’s son’s son will be 
preferred over the deceased’s brother’s son’s son.
(b). Rule 2 - When an heir in the same line is nearer to the common ancestor than 
another relation in the same line, the former is preferred to the latter. For example, a 
deceased’s father’s brother’s son will be preferred over his father’s brother’s grandson, 
even though both are in the same line, that is, the line starting from father’s father.
(c). Rule 3 - Neither heir is entitled to be preferred to other under Rule 1 and Rule 
2 and they will take shares in equal ratio.
Section 13 sets out rules to compute the manner in which the degree of closeness of 
the relationship of cognates and agnates are to be decided, which is reproduced below:
“(1). The relationship is to be reckoned from the male deceased to the heir in terms 
of degree of ascent or degree descent, or both, as the case may be.
(2). Degrees of ascent and descent shall be computed inclusive of the male 
deceased.
(3). Every generation constitutes a degree either ascending or descending.”
2.1.3.4. Blood relationships (Full Blood, Half Blood, Uterine Blood)
Another relevant rule of succession is that while deciding the proximity of relationships 
for devolution of a deceased’s shares upon heirs, the relationships of the heirs with the 
deceased are divided in different categories, depending upon the closeness of relationship 
between the two (as referred above).
The provisions in respect of blood relationships as dealt with in 2.1.3 (a) above are to 
be read with section 18, under which heirs related by full blood are preferred to heirs related 
by half-blood when determining devolution of property.
2.2. Hindu Undivided Family, Ancestral and Self-Acquired Property 
2.2.1. Hindu Undivided Family 
It is necessary to briefly touch upon the concept of a hindu undivided family (HUF), a 
unique concept under uncodified Hindu Law. A HUF is a body comprising persons lineally 
descended from a common ancestor and includes wives and unmarried daughters. A HUF 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 26
can be formed only by a family and not by an individual. Common examples of an HUF are a 
husband, wife and their children. An HUF comes into existence on its own when a person gets 
married. A married couple themselves can be considered an HUF. 
An HUF is important while determining succession planning of a Hindu as the income 
earned by members is considered to belong to the whole family and not to a specific individual. 
Under section 2(31) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (IT Act) an HUF is considered a ‘person’ 
and is assessed as a separate legal entity. Income of an HUF is taxed in its hands. 
2.2.2. Constituents of a HUF 
Coparceners
A coparcener is a person who acquires interest by birth, up to three generations from 
the senior most male member of the HUF. A coparcener is considered a member of an HUF. 
However, there is a difference between coparceners and members; coparceners have an 
interest in HUF property, but members do not. A coparcener also has the right to demand 
partition of the HUF. The position and rights of a coparcener takes on significant relevance in 
light of the amendments made to the HSA which are dealt with below.
Karta
The Karta is the senior most member of an HUF and tasked with the responsibility of 
managing the HUF and its property. The eldest coparcener takes on the role of the Karta of 
the HUF. The most significant power vested in a Karta is his legal right to deal and alienate 
any HUF property, if he considers that such alienation is for the benefit of the family. A Karta 
may alienate HUF property for legal necessity, for the benefit of the estate and maintenance 
of the family and for performance of certain indispensable duties.
2.2.3. Types of Property under Uncodified Hindu Law 
Under uncodified Hindu Law the primary types of property holding are ancestral 
property, joint family property and self-acquired property. 
Ancestral Property
Ancestral property is acquired through inheritance from ancestors. It is always shared 
by coparceners equally. This type of property is also known as Coparcenary Property. 
Joint Family Property
Joint family property is acquired by the members of a joint family together and also 
consists of ancestral property, wherein every coparcener has a joint interest in the property. 
Self-acquired Property
Self-acquired property is property that was either originally joint family property and 
has now become separate, or property that is self-acquired by an individual and HUF having 
any interest in such property. A member of an HUF may own separate or self-acquired 
property whilst continuing to be a member of the HUF. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 27
It is important to understand these different types of properties as they are dealt with 
differently under the HSA.
Nature of Ancestral Property & Self-acquired Property 
(a). Devolution based on share in property: Ancestral property and joint family property 
devolve upon the successors of a deceased, by survivorship, subject to the provisions of 
section 6 and section 30, only in respect of the deceased’s share in the property. Self-acquired 
property of a person can be dealt with in total and devolves upon his or her successors through 
succession. Although both can be made subject matter of a testamentary disposition, 
ancestral property and joint family property is limited to the share of the deceased, whereas 
self-acquired Property can be dealt with completely.
(b). Nature of Interest: All coparceners acquire interest in ancestral property by virtue of 
their birth into the family. Self-acquired property is the exclusive property of a person, and the 
HUF and its coparceners do not acquire any right to it.
(c). Alienation by Will: Prior to the HSA, no coparcener could alienate his undivided interest 
in ancestral property by way of will. Self-acquired property could be freely dealt with. However, 
Section 30 now enables a Hindu to dispose of his interest in a coparcenary property by way 
of will. Self-acquired property can be dealt with freely by creation of a will.
(d). Alienation by Gift: Self-acquired property can be freely gifted. A right or undivided 
interest in ancestral property cannot be gifted by a coparcener.
2.3. Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 
The Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 (2005 Amendment) brought about a 
revolutionary change to Hindu family law, amending several provisions, the most notable being 
conferment of rights and liabilities upon Hindu women in respect of property and inheritance. 
The principal amendments are:
(a). Granting of coparcenary rights to Hindu females: Females in a Hindu joint family governed 
by Mitakshara law are equally entitled to a share in ancestral property as their male 
counterparts, and granted the same rights and liabilities. 
(b). Abolition of survivorship: Prior to the 2005 Amendment, the interest of the deceased in 
property of a joint Hindu family would, on death, go to surviving co-owners of such property. 
However, post-amendment, such interest will devolve by testamentary or intestate 
succession.
(c). Allotment of shares in coparcenary property to Hindu females: If a Hindu male (in a joint 
Hindu family governed by Mitakshara law) died after the 2005 Amendment, his daughter will 
be allotted the same share as his son. The share of a pre-deceased son or pre-deceased 
daughter will be allotted to their surviving child/children. The 2005 Amendment does not affect 
the rights of a Hindu male to dispose of his self-acquired property under a will. If a male dies 
intestate, then his property will devolve by intestate succession above.
(d). Abolition of pious obligation: The doctrine of pious obligation existed in uncodified Hindu 
law and imposed an obligation on the son, grandson or great grandson of a deceased to pay 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 28
off all (the legal or moral and illegal or immoral) debts incurred by the deceased. Such 
obligation has been abolished.
(e). Right of a female heir to claim partition: Hindu female heirs can claim partition of a dwelling 
house occupied by a joint family; earlier reserved only to Hindu male heirs.
(f). A remarried widow of a pre-deceased son, pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son or 
brother will inherit property of the intestate.
2.4. The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 (Sharia Act)
Mohammedan Law is personal to Muslims, whether by birth or conversion. Section 2 
of the Sharia Act provides that, “notwithstanding any custom or usage to the contrary, in all 
questions (save question relating to agricultural land) regarding intestate succession, special 
property of female (including personal property), marriage, dissolution of marriage, including 
talaq, lis, zihar, lian, khula and mubarar’at, maintenance, dower, guardianship, gifts, trust and 
trust properties and wakfs (other than charities and religious endowments), Muslim personal 
law (shariat) is to apply to all cases where the parties are Muslim.”
2.4.1. Primary Sources of Muslim Law in India 
There are 4 primary sources of Muslim Law in India, that is, the Quran, the Sunnah of 
Hadis, Ijma and Qiya. 
The Quran 
All Muslim communities believe that the Quran is Al-furquan, meaning the one showing 
the truth as distinguished from falsehood and right from wrong. Out of its 6000 verses, only 
200 deal with legal principles, and of these only 80 deal with the law of personal status, like 
inheritance, marriage and divorce. 
The courts in India, while administering the law, cannot interpret the Quran in a way 
that is against the interpretation of the ancient commentators of established authority. It is the 
most highly regarded primary source of Mohammedan Law.
The Sunna 
In Arabic, Sunnah means “tradition” or “way”. It is to be interpreted as a kind of practice, 
that is, words, actions and teaching, of the Prophet or a precedent set by the prophet. Sunnah 
is understood to be the way of life as deduced from the Prophet’s behaviour. Examples of 
Sunnah include voluntary charity, voluntary prayer and fasting, good table manners etc. 
Ijma
Ijma is the Arabic term referring to consensus or agreement of Islamic scholars on a 
point of Islamic law. When a number of people who are learned in Islamic Law agree on a 
particular question, their consensus is binding on the Muslim community. This source is based 
on communal thinking and the belief that a community or group is less likely to make an error. 
The rules set out by Ijma have varying degrees of binding authority in different schools. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 29
The Ijma is considered to be the third most important source after the Quran and 
Sunnah by Sunni Muslims. There is often disagreement between different sects on the 
interpretation of such consensus, some believing that is the consensus of only the first three 
generations of Muslims whereas other sects believe that it is to be interpreted as the 
consensus of only Islamic scholars and jurists.
Qiyas
With the expansion of the Islamic community and their increased interactions with 
different societies, Muslims encountered new situations which were beyond the scope of both 
the Quran and the Sunnah. In Islamic law, the deduction of legal prescriptions from the Quran 
or Sunnah by analogic reasoning on matters not explicitly covered therein or unsystematic 
opinion is called Qiyas. It constitutes the fourth source of Muslim Law. 
2.4.2. Bequest of property by will (Wasiyatnama)
Property under Muslim law is anything which is capable of being transferred and which 
exist at the time of the testator’s death. The Fatwa-i-Alamgiri defines a will as the “conferment 
of a right of property in a specific thing, or in a profit or a gratuity to take effect on the death of 
the testator”. Under Muslim Law, only one-third of a person’s net estate may be bequeathed 
by will, subject to certain conditions and exceptions prescribed under Shia and Sunni law. 
2.4.3. Requirement of consent in case of bequest of one-third of property
Under Shia law, a testator can only dispose of one-third of his estate by will, either to 
an heir or a complete stranger (non-heir), without the consent of heirs. Bequests in excess of 
one-third, either to an heir or a complete stranger, will not take effect and will be invalid, 
unless the other heirs consent to it. Such consent may be given before or after the testator’s 
death.
Under Sunni law, a testator may dispose up to one-third of his estate only to a stranger, 
without the consent of the other heirs. However, bequest of up to one-third to an heir will not 
be effective without the consent of other heirs, which consent is required to be given after the 
testator's death. Consent, once given cannot be rescinded. Consent need not be expressly 
given; it may also be implied by conduct. If all heirs do not consent, the shares of those 
consenting will be bound, and the legacy in excess will be payable out of their shares. If 
consent is not given by the heirs to a bequest of up to one-third of the estate, the bequest will 
lapse and will form the part of the remaining estate of the testator. In case the bequest 
exceeds one-third of the entire estate of the testator, the bequest will abate and the shares 
will be distributed to the heirs mentioned in the will.
2.4.4. Bequest of property where a testator has no heirs 
If a Muslim has no heirs, there are no rules governing bequest of his estate and the 
same may be bequeathed entirely to a stranger.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 30
2.4.5. Manner of abatement of legacy in case bequest exceeds one-third without 
consent of heirs
If a bequest exceeds one-third of the whole estate, and heirs do not consent, the ratio 
of heirs receiving property under a will is subsidized to maintain the rule of one-third. This is 
called abatement of legacy.
 
Under Sunni law, the process of abatement is done in a rateable manner or 
proportionally, that is, reducing the ratio of the property bequeathed to the heirs to maintain 
the rule of one-third. The property will be reduced in the same ratio as the property was 
bequeathed to such heir in the testator's will.
Under Shia law, the process of abatement is undertaken in a preferential manner, that 
is, shares given to heirs under a will are not reduced but are distributed in chronological order, 
as stated in the will. The first name listed in the will, will receive the full shares bequeathed by 
the testator, and remaining shares will be passed in favour of the second, and then the third 
and so on, till the property reaches the one-third limit.
2.4.6. Bequest to a child in womb is valid
Under Sunni law, bequest to a child in the womb is valid, if the child is born within six 
months of the testator's death. If the child is not born within six months, the bequest will lapse 
and will form a part of the remaining property of the testator which is not bequeathed under a 
will. 
Under Shia law, a bequest to a child in the womb is valid, if it is born in the longest 
period of gestation, that is, ten lunar months (lunar month is basically time between one new 
moon or one full moon and next full one).
2.4.7. Bequest of property to an heir causing the testator's death
Under Sunni law, bequest to an heir causing the testator's death, whether intentionally 
or by accident, is not effective.
Under Shia law, bequest to an heir causing the testator's death, only intentionally, is 
not effective.
2.5. Chapter Review Questions
1. What laws of succession are applicable to persons professing different religions?
2. Which religious groups are governed by the HSA?
3. Does the HSA apply to testamentary succession?
4. What is a HUF?
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 31
5. How is the property of the intestate deceased distributed among full blood, half blood 
and uterine blood according to the HSA?
6. What is the rule of presumption under HSA?
7. How is the property distributed among the classes of the heirs of the deceased?
8. What changes were introduced to the HSA by the Hindu Succession (Amendment) 
Act, 2005?
9. What are the primary sources of Muslim Law in India?
10. What conditions must be followed by the testator while preparing the will under Muslim 
law in India?
11. What happens when property is bequeathed to a child in the womb under Muslim law?
12. Under Muslim law, what happens to a bequest of the person who caused testator’s 
death?
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 32
Chapter 3: Salient Features of the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925 in Testamentary 
and Intestate Succession
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
3-1 Understand common definitions.
3-2 Identify the applicability and salient features of the ISA.
Topics
3.1. Introduction
3.2. Definitions
3.3. Applicability of the Indian Succession Act, 1925
3.4.1. Persons capable of making a Will
3.4.2. Animus testandi 
3.4.3. Lapse of Legacy 
3.4.4. Bequest made to a class of persons 
3.4.5. Rule against perpetuity 
3.4.6. Onerous, Independent and Contingent Bequests 
3.4.7. Specific & Demonstrative Legacy 
3.5.1. General Rules of Intestacy
3.5.2. Rules specific to Parsis dying intestate
3.6. Chapter Review Questions 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 33
3.1. Introduction
Testamentary succession is succession by a testament or will made during one’s 
lifetime, determining the devolution of movable and immovable property after death. 
Testamentary succession in India is governed by the ISA and/or applicable personal law. This 
chapter deals with the salient aspects of testamentary succession, specifically Part VI of the 
ISA pertaining to wills, including wills of (i) Hindus, Jains, Sikhs, Buddhists, subject to section 
57, (ii) Indian Christians, (iii) Parsi and (iv) Jews. In matters of testamentary succession, the 
ISA will override all Hindu customs, traditions, and usages. This Chapter also deals with 
general rules of Intestate Succession as dealt with under the ISA.
3.2. Definitions
Important definitions: 
Will 
As defined in Chapter 1, a ‘Will’, under section 2(h), is a legal declaration of the 
intention of a testator with respect to his property which he desires to be carried into effect 
after his death. Part VI (Testamentary Succession) contains provisions on wills. While the 
words will and testament are generally synonymous, the ISA only uses the term ‘will’. 
Testator 
A testator (not defined) is understood to mean the maker or creator of a will. Under 
section 59, every person who has attained majority (above 18 years where there is a natural 
guardian, and above 21 years in case of an appointed guardian) and is of sound mind, may 
make a will. A female who makes a will is called a testatrix.
Legatee
A legatee (not defined) is understood to mean a person who inherits under a will.
Codicil
A ‘Codicil’, under section 2(b), means an instrument made in relation to a will, which 
explains, alters or adds to its dispositions, and is deemed to form a part of the will.
Executor
An ‘Executor’, under section 2(c), means a person to whom the execution of the will of 
a deceased person is, by the testator's appointment, confided; or simply put, a person 
appointed by a testator to execute the will. 
Administrator
An ‘Administrator’, under section 2(a), appointed by a competent authority to 
administer the estate of the deceased when there is no executor.
Probate
A ‘Probate’, under section 2(f), means a copy of a will certified by a Court with a grant 
of administration to the estate of the testator. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 34
Letters of Administration
Letters of Administration are granted where there is no will, or a will in which an 
executor has not been appointed.
Minor
‘Minor’, under section 2(e), means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen 
years. A minor cannot make a will, under section 59. 
3.3. Applicability of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 
The applicable/governing laws with respect to both testamentary and intestate 
succession for different religious groups in India are as follows: 
Succession for Hindus
The ISA applies to the testamentary succession of Hindus. Intestate succession is 
governed by the HSA. 
Succession for Muslims
The ISA does not apply to testamentary and intestate succession of Muslims. 
Succession for them is based on their uncodified personal law derived from religious sources 
(outlined in Chapter 2).
Succession for Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists
The ISA governs the testamentary succession of Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists. Intestate 
succession for them is governed by the HSA.
Succession for Christians, Parsis and Jews
Both testamentary succession and intestate succession for Christians, Parsis and Jew 
is governed by the ISA. 
As stated above, testamentary succession of Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists, 
Christians, Parsis and Jews is governed by Chapter VI which deals with the following matters:
3.4.1. Persons capable of making a Will 
Section 59 - capacity to make a will, which provides soundness of mind and age of 
majority as prerequisites. Soundness of mind is understood as the capacity to properly 
understand the meaning and consequences of one’s actions, and specifically capacity to 
understand the disposition of property under a will. 
Relevant explanations to section 59 are outlined below:
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 35
(a). Explanation 2 allows the deaf, dumb and blind to make a will if they are able to 
know what they do by it. 
(b). Explanation 3 allows a person who is ordinarily insane to make a will during 
an interval when he is of sound mind. Subsequent insanity does not make a will 
invalid. 
(c). Explanation 4 – contains a prohibition to making a will when one is in a state 
of mind that one does not know what one is doing. This includes intoxication and 
illness
General Principles
A will that appears to be duly signed and attested is presumed to be made by a person 
of sound mind, unless proved otherwise. The general rule relied by Indian Courts is that a 
person propounding a will (offering it for probate) would be called upon to show, by satisfactory 
evidence, that it was signed by the testator, that the testator, at the relevant time, was in a 
sound and disposing state of mind, that the testator understood the nature and effect of the 
dispositions and put his signature to the document of his own free will. 
The onus on the propounder can be taken to be discharged on proof of essential facts 
just indicated.6
If a will is rational on the face of it, and appears to be duly executed, it is 
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to be valid. 
Ordinarily when evidence adduced in support of a will, is satisfactory and sufficient to 
prove the sound and disposing state of the testator's mind and his signature as required by 
law, courts would opine in favour of the propounder.
Illustrations
X has a basic understanding of his surroundings but does not have a competent 
understanding as to the nature of his property, who should succeed him in his property or the 
effect of a will. X cannot make a valid will.
Q is suffering from a serious health condition but is capable of understanding the mode 
of disposing her property and making a rational choice of who should inherit her property. A 
will made by Q is valid. 
From the above a person should (i) understand and recollect the extent of his property, 
and (ii) understand that he is bequeathing his property to one or more persons. 
6 Mahesh Kumar (Dead) By L.Rs. vs. Vinod Kumar and Ors. 2012 (3) ALLMR (SC) 470
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 36
3.4.2. Animus testandi 
Animus means "intention to do something” and testandi “to make a will or testament”. 
Therefore, animus testandi is the intention to make will or testament is and a basic requirement 
of a valid will. For example, a mentally disabled person cannot make a valid will, because 
he/she lacks the intention. A person may produce an instrument in compliance with the legal 
requirements of a valid will, yet it may fail to take effect as valid, because of the absence of 
animus testandi, that is, without any intention that it should affect the disposition of his property 
after his death. When considering the validity of a will, courts look into the fact of whether there 
was animus testandi, that is, whether the testator had the intention to convey his property by 
means of the instrument7
.
3.4.3. Lapse of Legacy
Section 105 provides that if a legatee does not survive the testator, the legacy but will 
lapse and form part of the residue of the testator's property, unless it goes to another person 
under the will. To entitle the representatives of the legatee to receive the legacy, it must be 
proved that he survived the testator. Under section 106, if a legacy is given to two persons 
jointly, and one of them dies before the testator, the other legatee will take the entire legacy. 
Illustrations
The testator bequeaths a property to A. A dies before the testator; the legacy lapses 
and forms part of the residue of the testator’s property. 
A bequest is made to B and his children. B dies before the testator, the legacy to B 
and his children lapses.
A legacy is given to X, and, in case X dies before the testator, to Z. X dies before the 
testator. The legacy goes to Z. 
The testator and the legatee perish in the same car accident. There is no evidence to 
show which died first. The legacy lapses. 
3.4.4. Bequest made to a class of persons
Section 111 deals with survivorship in case of bequest to a described class. It provides, 
“Where a bequest is made simply to a described class of persons, the thing bequeathed shall 
go only to such as be alive at the testator's death. 
Exception.- If property is bequeathed to a class of persons described as standing in a 
particular degree of kindred to a specified individual, but their possession of it is deferred until 
a time later than the death of the testator by reason of a prior bequest or otherwise, the 
property shall at that time go to such of them as are then alive, and to the representatives of 
any of them who have died since the death of the testator.” 
77 Satappa Ors. vs. Shantappa and Ors. MANU/KA/3201/2017
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 37
Illustrations
A bequeaths a garage to “the children of B” without saying when it is to be distributed
among them. B had died previous to the date of the will, leaving three children, X, Y and Z. Z 
died after the date of the will, but before the death of A. X and Y survive A. The legacy will 
belong to X and Y to the exclusion of the representatives of Z. 
 
A bequeaths a house to B for life and after his death equally among the children of C. 
Up to the death of B, C had not had any child. The bequest after the death of B is void. 
3.4.5. Rule against perpetuity
The rule against perpetuity is defined in section 114. It provides that a bequest will not 
be valid if vesting of the thing bequeathed may be delayed beyond the lifetime of one or more 
persons living at the testator’s death and the minority of some person who shall be in existence 
at the expiration of that period and to whom, if he attains full age, the thing bequeathed is to 
belong. 
The rule against perpetuity relates to any property, whatever be its nature, and whether 
it is movable or immovable. This rule against perpetuity is also envisaged under section 14 of 
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (TOPA) and limits the maximum time period beyond which 
property cannot be transferred. The rule against perpetuity does not apply to charitable or 
religious endowments.
Illustrations
A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to B for his life, and after B’s 
death to such of B's sons as shall first attain the age of 25. B dies in the lifetime of the testator, 
leaving one or more sons. In this case the sons of B are persons living at the time of the 
testator’s death, and the time when either of them will attain 25 necessarily falls within his own 
lifetime. The bequest is valid. 
A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to B for his life, with a direction 
that after B’s death it shall be divided amongst such of B’s children as shall attain the age of 
18, but that, if no child of B shall attain that age, the fund shall go to C. Here the time for the 
division of the fund must arrive at the latest at the expiration of 18 years from the death of B, 
a person living at the testator's decease. All the bequests are valid.
3.4.6. Onerous, Independent & Contingent Bequests
Onerous Bequests
Under section 122, when a bequest imposes an obligation, the legatee can take 
nothing unless he accepts it fully. This is known as an onerous bequest. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 38
Illustration
A bequeaths her house to X on the condition that X will pay for the education of her 
surviving children. X refuses to perform this obligation and therefore will not receive the house 
bequeathed to her. 
Independent Bequests
Section 123 provides that where a will contains two separate and independent 
bequests to the same person, the legatee is at liberty to accept one of them and refuse the 
other, although the former may be beneficial and the latter onerous. 
Illustration
J bequeaths the sum of INR 50,000, and also a villa in Goa, to A, with the bequest of 
the villa on the condition to that A will have to reside there. A may accept the bequest of money 
and refuse to accept the bequest of the villa. 
Contingent Bequests
Section 124 deals with a bequest contingent upon a specified uncertain event, where 
no time is mentioned for its occurrence. It provides that, in such a case, the legacy cannot 
take effect, unless such event happens before the period when the fund/property bequeathed 
is payable or distributable. 
Illustrations
A legacy is bequeathed to A, and, in case of his death, to B. If A survives the testator, 
the legacy to B does not take effect. 
 
A legacy is bequeathed to P for life, and, after his death to Q, and, "in case of Q’s death 
without children," to R. The language "in case of Q’s death without children" is to be 
understood as meaning in case Q dies without children during the lifetime of P. 
3.4.7. Specific & Demonstrative Legacy
Specific Legacy
Section 142 describes a specific legacy as a specific part of the testator’s property 
(distinguished from all other parts of his property) bequeathed to a legatee. The three 
essentials of a specific legacy are: (a) the property must form part of the testator’s estate, (b) 
it must be identified and distinguished from the remainder of the estate, and (c) there must be 
an intention to bequeath it to a legatee. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 39
Illustrations
C having several immovable properties at New Delhi and also in several other cities, 
bequeaths to D all the immovable property at New Delhi. 
X owns five horses of different breeds and bequeaths his Arabian racehorse to Y. 
Demonstrative Legacy
Section 150 describes a demonstrative legacy as one where a testator bequeaths to a 
legatee a sum of money or a quantity of a commodity from a particular fund or stock. 
The explanation to section 150 sets out a distinction between a specific legacy and a 
demonstrative legacy, that is: “where specified property is given to the legatee, the legacy is 
specific; where the legacy is directed to be paid out of specified property, it is demonstrative”. 
A demonstrative legacy therefore is specific in terms of what the legatee will receive 
but general in terms of the part of the testator’s estate from which such bequest will be made. 
If the fund out of which it is directed to be paid, fails, the legatee will not be deprived of the 
legacy, but will receive the deficiency from the general assets or estate of the testator. 
Illustrations
A bequeaths to B, INR 5,000 being part of a debt due to him from B. He also bequeaths 
to C INR 10,000 to be paid out of his bank accounts, which are further bequeathed to X. The 
legacy to B is specific; the legacy to C is demonstrative. 
A bequeaths to B monthly maintenance of INR 50,000, payable for 2 years. The 
bequest to B is a demonstrative legacy as it is payable out of A’s estate.
Order of payment when legacy directed to be paid out of fund the subject of Specific 
Legacy
Section 151 provides, “that where a portion of a fund is specifically bequeathed and a 
legacy is directed to be paid out of the same fund, the portion specifically bequeathed shall 
first be paid to the legatee, and the demonstrative legacy shall be paid out of the residue of 
the fund and, so far as the residue shall be deficient, out of the general assets of the testator.” 
Hence, a specific bequest from the fund will first be distributed to the intended legatee 
who is receiving the specific legacy and then the legatee receiving the demonstrative legacy 
will receive his bequest, first from the fund and then from the testator’s general estate. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 40
Illustration
A bequeaths to B INR 1,000 being part of a debt due to him from W. He also bequeaths 
to C INR 1,000 to be paid out of the debt due to him from W. The debt due to A from W is only 
INR 1,500 rupees; of this INR 1,500, INR 1,000 belong to B, and INR 500 is to be paid to C. 
C is also to receive INR 500 from the general assets of the testator.
3.5.1. General Rules of Intestacy 
When dealing with intestacy, the ISA is divided into two parts, (i) Rules in case of 
intestates other than Parsis, covered in Chapter II under sections 31 to 49; and (ii) Special 
rules for Parsis specified under Chapter III vide sections 50 to 56. 
Section 32 states that “The property of an intestate devolves upon the wife or husband, 
or upon those who are of the kindred of the deceased, in the order and according to the rules 
hereinafter contained in this Chapter.” 
The governing rules are as follows:
(a). If the intestate has left a widow and lineal descendants, then one-third goes to 
the widow and balance two-thirds to the lineal descendants8
. 
(b). If the intestate is survived by the widow and kindred, but no lineal descendants, 
then one-half goes to the widow and the balance one-half to the kindred9
. 
(c). If there are no lineal descendants or kindred then, that the property goes 
entirely to the surviving husband or wife10
. 
Further, the ISA lays down the rules of distribution among the widow, lineal 
descendants and the kindred of a deceased. According to section 36, if the intestate has left 
a surviving spouse, then his/her share is to be deducted first and then distributed amongst 
lineal descendants and kindred. The rules of distribution among both lineal descendants and 
kindred are contained in sections 33 to 49 of the ISA and deal with every different situation 
that may arise on the death of an intestate, depending on the descendants that survive or 
predecease the intestate.
3.5.2. Rules specific to Parsis dying Intestate
In respect of testamentary succession, all the sections of the ISA are applicable to 
Parsis. However, in cases of intestate succession, there are specific sections carved out which 
are applicable exclusively to Parsis, that is, section 50 to 56 contained in Chapter III of Part V. 
Normal rules of intestacy such as consanguinity do not apply to Parsis. 
General rules are contained in section 50 and are as follows:
8 Section 33(a) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
9 Section 33 (b) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
10 Section 33(c) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 41
(a). No distinction between a living child and a child in the womb who is subsequently born 
alive;
(b). Lineal descendants of an intestate who have died in the lifetime of the intestate without 
leaving a widow or widower or any lineal descendant shall not be considered for 
intestate succession;
(c). A widow or widower of any relative of an intestate who has remarried during the lifetime 
of an intestate shall not be considered and shall be deemed to not exist at the time of 
the intestate’s death.
Section 51 deals with the division of property between widow/widower, children and 
parents of the deceased. The general rule is that if a widow and heirs are alive at the time of 
the death, property will be divided between the widow and each child in equal shares. Further, 
if there is no widow/widower, the children inherit in equal shares. In a case where the parents 
of the intestate are alive in addition to children and/or widower, the property is divided so that 
each parent receives a share equal to half the share of each child.
Sections 52 to 56 deal with specific situations such as division of share of predeceased 
child of intestate leaving lineal descendants, division where intestate leaves no lineal 
descendants but leaves widow/widower of any lineal descendant, where no relative is entitled 
to succeed, and so forth.
3.6. Chapter Review Questions
1. Who can make a will?
2. Who does the ISA govern?
3. What is a lapsed legacy? 
4. What is the difference between bequest and inheritance?
5. What is the ‘rule against perpetuity’?
6. Explain the difference between a specific and demonstrative legacy with an 
illustration. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 42
Chapter 4: Types of Wills & 
Requirements of a Valid Will
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
4-1 Distinguish between the different types of Wills 
4-2 Understand the basic requirements of a valid Will
Topics
4.1. Introduction
4.2. Classification of Wills 
4.3. Types of Unprivileged Wills 
4.3.1. Contingent Will
4.3.2. Concurrent Will 
4.3.3. Mutual Wills & Joint Wills
4.3.4. Holograph Will
4.3.5. Duplicate Will 
4.4. Requirements of a valid Will
4.5. Duly and validly executed Will 
4.6. Attestation
4.7. Appointment of an Executor 
4.8. Amending a Will
4.9. Chapter Review Questions
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 43
4.1. Introduction
Estate planning is an integral part of financial management. Therefore, it is necessary 
to understand the different types of wills recognised in India to effectively assist clients. This 
Chapter also focuses on the importance and requisites of a valid will, the role of an attesting 
witness, alterations made to, or a revocation of, a will, and the necessary requirements of a 
valid will. 
4.2. Classification of Wills 
Wills are broadly classified into privileged wills (Section 65) and unprivileged wills 
(Section 63). The distinction between the two lies in the procedure of execution.
Privileged Will
A special will made in extraordinary circumstances like war or a dangerous expedition. 
Such will can be made oral or in writing. Section 65 provides that any will made by a soldier 
or an airman or a mariner, who has attained the age of eighteen, when he is in actual service 
and is engaged in actual warfare, would be privileged. Such person can dispose of his property 
by a will as prescribed by the mode, manner and rules as described in section 66. 
Unprivileged Will
Every other person who does not fall into the exception carved out for privileged wills, 
can only make an unprivileged will. Unprivileged wills include joint wills, mutual wills and 
contingent wills. These are dealt with below.
A privileged will must be in writing, contain a signature or mark of the testator in 
presence of two attesting witnesses who must also sign or affix their marks in the presence of 
the testator. 
4.3. Types of Unprivileged Wills
4.3.1. Contingent Will
A contingent will is the grant and bestowment of estate, in whole or part, to a 
beneficiary/legatee, subject to fulfilment of condition or event that must be mentioned in the 
will. It attains validity and operates only if the conditions or contingencies prescribed in the will 
have been satisfied or occurred, failing which the will is void. 
The Kerala High Court, in Sridevi Amma & Ors v Venikitaparasurama Ayyan & Ors11, set out 
the following rules for determining the validity of a contingent will:
(1). Such will depends upon the happening of a specified condition or contingency and 
if it fails, the will is inoperative and void thereafter.
11 AIR 1960 Ker 1
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 44
(2). To be regarded as contingent depends upon the intention of the testator, appearing 
either expressly or by necessary implication from the language of the will as a 
whole.
(3). A will is not made conditional merely by statements which have no reasonable or 
logical relation to the testator’s property.
(4). A statement of circumstances which merely indicate necessity, or reason, or 
inducement to make the will, will not make it contingent. 
(5). Where it is doubtful whether a will is contingent, the circumstances under which 
the will was executed or its language should be considered.”
4.3.2. Concurrent Will
Concurrent wills are two wills written by one person, each providing instructions on 
how certain assets of the testator are to be dealt with. For example, one will may deal with 
immovable property exclusively and the other with movable property. They co-exist with one 
another and together, and are held to be valid in law. 
A testator may consider such option to bring about clarity in respect of the distribution 
of his estate, by dividing certain property or beneficiaries into categories, which are defined by 
separate wills. Concurrent wills sometimes cause problems if the wills are not divided 
specifically and contain contradictory statements that deal with the same property in both wills.
4.3.3. Mutual Wills & Joint Wills
Mutual Will
A mutual will is executed by two persons (both testators) who mutually agree, on 
certain terms and conditions, and confer reciprocal benefits upon each other, making each 
other legatees. The terms and conditions of such will are binding on the surviving testator after 
the death of the other. Common examples include a will between a husband and wife 
distributing their respective estates to each other in case of death.
Joint Will
A joint will is one where two or more persons agree to make a conjoint will to determine 
how their joint estate will devolve upon their beneficiaries. An essential feature of this will is 
that it must stipulate conditions in the case of death of one of the testators. If such a will intends 
to take effect after the death of two or more persons, then it cannot be enforceable during the 
lifetime of the other(s). The surviving testator(s) is/are bound to the terms and provisions of 
the will as they can only be altered or amended with consent by both or all testators. In such 
case, a constructive trust is to be formed which holds assets of the deceased testator, till the 
death of the surviving testator(s). A will may be revocable during the lifetime of the testators, 
but once one dies it becomes irrevocable and binding on the other(s). In Minakshi Ammal vs. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 45
Viswanatha Aiyar12, the Court held that a joint will can validly be made by two persons and 
that it may be made to take effect after the death of both testators. The Court also held that if 
the joint will is not a disposition by each testator of his own property but a disposition of joint 
property after the death of the survivor, the will cannot be proved till the death of the survivor.
4.3.4. Holograph Will
A holograph will is entirely handwritten and also known as a handwritten will. Unlike 
other wills, it need not be attested by two witnesses to be considered valid. A common 
drawback of such will is that it depends on the legibility of the handwriting. In Sanat Kumar 
Das & Ors v Smt Arati Das13, an application in respect of letters of administration for a Will 
handwritten by the deceased was accepted by the Calcutta High Court. 
4.3.5. Duplicate Will
A duplicate will is one where a testator executes two copies of the will. Usually one 
copy is retained by the testator, and the other deposited with another person, which may be 
the executor, a trustee, or even an institution such as a bank. This may be done for safety or 
safekeeping. Although there is more than one copy in existence at the same time, each copy 
is considered a single will. In order for a duplicate will to be considered valid, a testator must 
execute the duplicate copy as was done for the original, in accordance with section 63. 
Further, if the testator destroys the original in his custody, all copies regarded as a duplicate(s) 
are to be considered as revoked.
4.4. Requirements of a valid Will
The essential requirements of a valid will, prescribed by law and in judgements, are 
enumerated below:
(a). In Mathai Samuel v Eapen Eapen14, the Court held that a valid will must be a legal 
declaration of the testator’s intention, the testator’s declaration must be with respect to 
his property, and it must contain the desire of the testator that the said declaration 
should be effectuated after his death. 
(b). A will can be made by any person of sound mind not being a minor (above the age of 
18 years as declared in the Indian Majority Act, 1875). This is also provided in section 
59.
(c). A valid will must have the testator’s mark or signature as required by section 63(a), 
without which it cannot be considered a valid will.
12 (1909) 33 Mad. 406
13 (2010) 1 ICC 648 (Cal) (DB)
14 2012 (8) SLT 620
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 46
(d). Section 63(c) deals with attestation by witnesses, and provides that a will has to be 
attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom should have seen the testator 
signing the will. This was ratified in Gopal Swaroop vs. Krishna Murari Mangal and 
Ors.15
.
(e). It must not be made or obtained by fraud, coercion or importunity. Section 61 provides 
that a will made by fraud, coercion or importunity and eliminates the free will of the 
testator, is void. In Asutosh vs. Umasashi16, it was held that the influence to vitiate an 
act must amount to force and coercion destroying free agency, and ordinarily when 
evidence adduced in support of a will is satisfactory and sufficient to prove sound and 
disposing state of the testator and his signature is as required by law, one may be 
justified in making a finding in favour of the will’s validity. However, in cases where 
executor of the will is surrounded with suspicious circumstances and the propounder 
fails to remove the suspicion as to the execution of the will, probate would be refused.
(f). A will can be made at any time during the lifetime of a person and there is no restriction 
as to number of times a will can be made. However, only the last will made before the 
death of the testator is valid.
(g). A will may be amended at any time. If a testator wishes to amend any part of his/her 
will without changing the entire will, the same can be achieved by a codicil.
4.5. Duly and validly executed Will 
The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (Evidence Act) and the Registration Act confer 
registration of any document evidentiary value in a court of law, especially when the existence 
of such document is challenged. Notwithstanding this, it is not mandatory to register a will as 
provided in section 18(e) of the Registration Act, in which wills are included in the category of 
instruments where registration is optional. In Ishwarao Narain Singh vs. Kamla Devi & Ors.17
, 
the Supreme Court held that the genuineness of a will cannot be challenged on the grounds 
of non-registration.
Although registration may not be mandatory, it has some advantages such as: 
(a). protection of the will as it is kept in the safe custody in the office of the Registrar. 
A person not desirous of registering the will may also deposit the same in safe 
custody with the Registrar so that it may be made available to the executors upon 
the death;
(b). Secrecy of the will is maintained because not anyone can examine the will and its 
contents without express permission in writing by the testator himself; or upon his 
death, to any person applying to obtain certified copies on production of his death 
certificate as prescribed under section 57 of the Registration Act. A will deposited 
with the Registrar will generally secure the same from loss or tampering.
(c). A copy of the certified will can only be granted after the death of the testator, to a 
person who applies to obtain the same and submits the death certificate of the 
testator obtained from the concerned authorities. This benefit is only applicable to 
15 2011 (84) ALR 242
16 AIR 1984 Cal 233
17 AIR 1954 SC 280
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 47
persons who apply for certified copies, and not relatives of the deceased whose 
intentions are malafide.
Section 40 of the Registration Act provides that a testator (during his lifetime) and a 
person claiming as an executor or otherwise after the death of a testator, is entitled to present 
a will for registration. Registration may also be undertaken after the death of the testator by 
the executor or any person claiming as executor or otherwise under a will, by presenting it to 
the Registrar for registration. There is no time bar on registration, and it may be presented for 
registration at any time, as prescribed by section 27 of the Registration Act.
Section 43 of the Registration Act contains the procedure to be followed post 
registration. After presenting a will for registration, the Registrar must be satisfied that the 
person presenting it for deposit is the testator, or a duly authorised representative, or agent, 
of the testator. The Registrar will take the will into his custody and place it inside a fire-proof 
box. If the testator wishes to withdraw a deposited will, an application may be made under 
section 44 of the Registration Act, either personally or by duly authorised agent. If the Registrar 
is satisfied that the applicant is actually the testator or his agent, he will deliver it accordingly. 
Section 45 of the Registration Act provides that on the death of a testator who has 
deposited or registered a will, an application may be made to the Registrar who holds the will 
in his deposit to open the same. If the Registrar is satisfied that the testator is dead, he, in the 
applicant's presence, will open the box containing the will, and, at the applicant's expense, 
cause the contents thereof to be copied into his ‘Book No. 3’ for record purposes. When such 
copy has been made, the Registrar will re-deposit the original will. 
4.6. Attestation 
The word “attest” means to bear witness to a fact. Section 63(c) mandates that:
(a). a will must be attested by two or more witnesses,
(b). attestation must be in the presence of the testator,
(c). the witnesses must have to see the testator sign or affix his mark to the will or have 
received personal acknowledgement from the testator that he himself has signed the 
will.
(d). it is not necessary that both witnesses be present at the same time or attest 
simultaneously, but the requirement is that each of the attesting witness must have 
seen the testator sign or affix his mark to the will or has received from the testator a 
personal acknowledgement of his signature or mark upon the will. Each of the attesting 
witness is required to sign the will in the presence of the testator.18
An attesting witness is considered to be one who signs the document in the presence 
of executant/testator after seeing the execution of the document or after receiving personal 
acknowledgment of the testator with regard to the execution of the document19. It is essential 
that the attesting witness puts his signature animo attestandi, that is, for the purpose of 
18 Punni vs. Sumer Chand and Ors. AIR 1995 HP 74
19 Beni Chand (Since Dead) Now by L.R. v Kamla Kunwar and Ors. AIR 1977 SC 63
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 48
attesting that he has seen the testator sign or has received from him a personal 
acknowledgment of his signature (as dealt with in Chapter 3). 
These requirements are to provide an added level of proof when determining the 
validity of a will. Often, attesting witnesses serve the purpose of being able to help authenticate 
the valid execution of a will. A reading of section 63(c) with sections 6820 and 6921 of the 
Evidence Act establishes that a person propounding the validity of a will has to prove that it 
was duly and validly executed, and that should be done by not merely establishing that 
signature on the will was that of the testator but also the attestations were made in the manner 
as contemplated in section 63(c). Section 68 of the Evidence Act does not make it mandatory 
to examine both the attesting witnesses. However, it follows that if one attesting witness 
proves that the testator had acknowledged his signature to him then it is not necessary for the 
other attesting witness to acknowledge. Therefore, mere signatures of witnesses towards the 
end of an instrument or somewhere on an instrument are sufficient to show without explanation 
that the witnesses put their signatures by way of saying that they had seen the document 
being executed and had received an acknowledgement. It is not necessary for them to state 
that they put their signatures in the presence of the testator.22
4.7. Appointment of an Executor 
An executor derives his authority from the will and is appointed by a testator to fulfil his 
last wishes as prescribed by his will and ensure that his estate is dealt with as per his will. A 
testator should ideally appoint a person that he believes will be able to efficiently execute his 
directions, as per the provisions of his will. In order to be considered a capable executor, the 
only requirements are those of majority and being of sound mind. Even a minor can be 
appointed as executor. However probate of the will can be granted only when he/she attains 
the age of majority under section 223.23
A testator is not bound to appoint only a single executor and may appoint more. As 
stated above if a testator does not appoint an executor, a petition for Letters of Administration 
would have to be filed and on grant thereof the will administered in accordance with its terms. 
For the convenient administration of an estate, section 224 permits a person to appoint 
different executors for one will, and provides that probate for separate wills may be granted to 
all executors simultaneously. In such case the estate will remain as one, though its 
administration will vest in separate executors. When a testator appoints several executors, the 
normal inference should be that he expects all of them to act together, the opinion of the 
testator implicit in the appointment being that he expects that his will be fully and properly 
executed when all executors appointed by him act together. 
20 Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872: Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested: If a 
document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has 
been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there is an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process 
of the Court and capable of giving evidence.
21 Section 69 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872: Proof where no attesting witness found: If no such attesting witness 
can be found, or if the document purports to have been executed in the United Kingdom, it must be proved that the 
attestation of one attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the signature of the person executing the 
document is in the handwriting of that person.
22 Dulhin Ful Kueri and Ors. vs. Moti Jharo Kuer AIR 1972 Pat 214
23 Section 223 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925: Persons to whom probate cannot be granted – Probate cannot 
be granted to any person who is a minor or is of unsound mind nor to any association of individuals unless it is a 
company which satisfies the condition prescribed by the rules made by the State Government.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 49
A legatee under a will can be an executor under section 141. If a legacy or bequest is 
given to an executor, in compensation of his service as such executor, the same should be 
mentioned in the will. If an executor is a professional, then a provision for his remuneration 
may be inserted. 
The most important function of an executor is set out in section 222, which provides 
that probate may be granted only to an executor appointed under the will. However, if an 
executor renounces or fails to accept executorship within a reasonable time, Letters of 
Administration would have to be filed. An executor may renounce his executorship either orally 
in the presence of judge or in writing signed by him. After renouncement is made, the executor 
is precluded to apply for probate. An executor is considered a confidante of choice of the 
testator and therefore renunciation is irrevocable and irreversible. 
An executor is required meet all obligations and outstanding debts, if any, of the 
deceased and transfer of assets to the beneficiaries or legatees. The powers of an executor 
are contained in sections 305 to 315, which include disposal of property of the deceased, 
general powers of administration, directly or indirectly purchasing any part of the property of 
the deceased, etc. 
The duties of an executor are enumerated in sections 316 to 331 and include the duty 
to provide funds for the deceased’s funeral ceremonies and expenses, allocating costs 
incurred in judicial proceedings necessary for administrating the estate, paying wages for 
services rendered to the deceased, etc. The powers and duties of an executor have been 
dealt with extensively in Chapter 5.
4.8. Amending a Will
It is always advisable that a testator makes his will irrevocable in the strongest and 
most express terms. However, the testator is not bound by it, and is always entitled to alter 
and/or revoke the same at any time under section 62.
For modifying, altering or amending a will, there are three options available, that is, (i) 
overwrite the original will along with obtaining new signatures of the attesting witnesses, (ii) 
preparing a codicil, or (iii) preparing and executing a new will. While there is no restriction on 
overwriting an original will, it is preferable that a codicil or new will in made and executed to 
avoid confusion, ambiguity or uncertainty. 
Codicils
A codicil is an instrument specifically made in relation to an executed will, that explains, 
alters or adds to its dispositions, and is deemed to form part of the will24
. A codicil may be 
endorsed upon the original will itself, or be a separate document. It is considered an extension 
or addendum of a will and the procedure for execution is similar to the execution of a will. 
Executing a codicil does not bar a testator from further amending his will.
A codicil should ideally refer the specific provisions of the will that are sought to be 
added, removed or altered. In Bhagat Ram v Suresh25 the court held that the same rules of 
execution that apply to a will are applicable to codicils, and that the evidence adduced in proof 
24 Section 2(b) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
25 AIR 2004 SC 436
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 50
of execution of a codicil must satisfy the same requirements so as to apply to prove the 
execution of a will26
. 
As discussed above, registration of a will is optional and the same applies to a codicil. 
However, in practice, if the will is registered, the codicil should be registered. The rationale 
behind registration of both the will and its codicil is to imbibe authenticity of the codicil and 
mitigate against litigation challenging the genuineness of the unregistered codicil.
New Will
In order to carry out structural changes to a will, or when a will requires an overall 
change or the circumstances warrant changing substantial dispositions or bequests, it is 
preferable to execute a new will. This also may apply to a case where several codicils have 
been made, which may lead to an operational nightmare for the executor and/or improper 
distribution of the estate and/or several unhappy beneficiaries/legatees. 
A new (subsequent) will be deemed to revoke the previous will or codicils and is to be 
considered as the last will and testament. There are no restrictions as to the number of times 
the testator may make a will. However, only the last (validly made) will would operate and be 
enforceable. Absence of a recital or confirmation in a new will expressly stating that all earlier 
wills have been revoked has no relevance once the execution of the new will is duly proved. 
In Lachho Bibi vs. Gopi Narain27, the court placed the initial onus of proof on the propounder 
of the will and held that: “The first rule is that the onus probandi lies in every case is upon the 
party propounding a Will, and he must satisfy the conscience of the Court that the instrument 
so propounded is the last Will and testament of a capable testator.”
4.9. Chapter Review Questions
1. What is a will?
2. What are the different types of wills?
3. What are the essentials of a valid will?
4. Is it mandatory to register a will?
5. What is the objective of a codicil?
6. How can a will be altered or amended?
26 Bhagat Ram and Ors. vs. Suresh and Ors. AIR 2004 SC 436
27 Lachho Bibi vs. Gopi Narain and Ors. (1901) ILR 23 All 472
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 51
Chapter 5: Administration of an Estate 
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
5-1 Understand the role and powers vested in an executor. 
5-2 Understand the importance and general procedure for obtaining a probate.
Topics
5.1. The Executor – Legal representative in fiduciary capacity
5.2. Powers of an Executor or Administrator 
5.3. Duties, Role and Responsibilities of Executor and Administrators under the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925
5.3.1. Aggregate inventory of estate and assessed value
5.3.2.1. Probate – Definition
5.3.2.2. Importance and Applicability of a Probate
5.3.2.3. Obtaining a Probate
5.3.3. Establish solvency of the estate, pay expenses, pay off debt on priority
5.3.4. Ancillary Duties & Responsibilities of an Executor or Administrator
5.4. Chapter Review Questions
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 52
5.1. The Executor – Legal representative in a fiduciary capacity
As dealt with earlier, an executor is a person selected by the testator to execute his 
last will and testament. An executor is the legal representative of a testator, acts in a fiduciary 
capacity and holds the assets of the testator after his death, with the authority and duty to 
make decisions per the will. A general example of a fiduciary relationship is one between a 
parent and a minor child, where the parent is responsible for minor’s money or property. It is, 
therefore, the responsibility of an executor to meet all obligations of outstanding debts, if any, 
of the deceased and give consent for transfer of assets to the beneficiaries or legatees under 
the will.
Administrators and executors are an important part of the succession chain especially 
in light of the powers vested in them. Sections 305 to 315 of Chapter VI enumerates the 
powers of executors and administrators, and sections 316 to 331 of Chapter VII set out their 
duties and obligations.
5.2. Powers of an Executor or Administrator 
(a). An Executor has been granted the same powers as the deceased, not only to sue any 
party for all causes of action that survive the deceased but also to recover debts 
owed.28
(b). Section 306 provides that all demands and rights to prosecute or defend any action or 
special proceeding in favour or against a testator at the time of death, survive to and 
against his executors and/or administrators, subject to certain exceptions;
(c). Section 211 confers upon an executor or administrator complete legal right over the 
assets of a testator who are his legal representative for all purposes, and, in whom, on 
death of the testator, all the property vests. Section 307(1) supplements section 211 
and grants an executor or administrator power to dispose of and deal with the property 
of the deceased, vested in him, either wholly or in part, in such manner as he may think 
fit. However, there are certain caveats or exceptions to this power contained in section 
307(2) which lays down the following restrictions in cases where the deceased is 
Hindu, Muslim, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain or an exempted person:
(i). the power of an executor is subject to and is limited by any restriction contained 
in the will. However, if probate has been granted which states in an order in 
writing that despite the restriction, the executor may dispose the property, then 
such restriction will fall away.
(ii). An administrator may not, without the previous permission of the court by 
which letters of administration were granted -
(a) mortgage, charge or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise any 
immoveable property for the time being vested in him under section 211; or 
(b) lease any property for a term exceeding five years. 
28 Section 305 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 53
If an executor or administrator deals with property in a manner that is in contravention 
of the restrictions imposed in section 307, the disposal is voidable at the instance of 
any other person interested in the property.
(d). An executor or administrator is granted general powers of administration under section 
308 and is allowed to incur expenditure from the deceased’s estate on any acts which 
may be necessary for proper care and management of any property belonging to the 
estate. An executor may also make reasonable improvements to the property, with the
sanction of the court.
(e). In order to ensure that an executor or administrator maintains his fiduciary relationship 
with the deceased, section 310 expressly bars purchase of any part of the property of 
the deceased, either directly or indirectly, by the executor or administrator. In such a 
case, the purchase by and sale to an executor or administrator is voidable at the 
instance of any other person interested in the property.
(f). Section 311 gives the same powers, severally, to all executors or administrators in 
cases where several have been appointed by a deceased. For example, any one of 
the several executors has power to release any debt due, or to sell the property of the 
deceased whether movable or immovable. If any one executor or administrator dies, 
the powers vest in the surviving executors, in the absence of any contrary direction 
that may be contained to deal specifically in the will.29
(g). Section 314 gives the same powers to a minor appointed as an administrator as if 
he/she was appointed as an administrator who has attained the age of majority. 
Section 315 gives a married woman to whom a probate or letters of administration has 
been granted, the same powers as an ordinary executor or administrator.
5.3. Duties, Role and Responsibilities of Executors and Administrators under the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925
A few of the primary duties of an executor and administrator are set out below:
5.3.1. Aggregate inventory of estate and assessed value
An executor and administrator is tasked with the duty of taking inventory and account 
of the estate. Section 317 lays down a period of six months after a grant of probate or letters 
of administration, to provide inventory of the estate containing a true and full estimate of 
property in possession, credits due and debts owed to the deceased. It also provides a oneyear period after the grant of probate or letters of administration, to furnish accounts to the 
court of the estate showing those assets which have come into the hands of the executor or 
administrator and the manner in which they were applied for or disposed of. The inventory to 
29 Section 312 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 54
be provided under section 317 must be inclusive of all property, in any state throughout India 
and all such property must be stated separately state-wise.30
If an executor or administrator on being required by the court to exhibit an inventory or 
account under this section, intentionally fails to comply with the requisition, he would be 
deemed to have committed an offence under section 176 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) 
and the intentional provision of a false inventory or account would be deemed to be an offence 
under section 193 of the IPC. In Shernaz Faroukh Lawyer vs. Manek Daru Sukhadwala31
, the
court referred to Bai Panbai (supra) while dealing with the provisions of section 317, and held 
that an executor or administrator may be compelled to exhibit an inventory and render an 
account of his administration of the personal estate of the testator, and if accounts are 
intentionally false, the executor or administrator makes himself liable to punishment and the 
interested parties can file an action against the executor or administrator for questioning the 
correctness of the accounts32
. 
5.3.2.1. Probate – Definition 
A probate is defined under section 2(f) as the “copy of a will certified under the seal of 
a Court of competent jurisdiction with a grant of administration to the estate of the testator”. 
5.3.2.2. Importance and Applicability of a Probate 
A probate once granted is considered to legalise the will and acts as formal permission 
to the executor to transfer the properties to whom they are bequeathed. A harmonious reading 
of sections 213(1) and 57(1) reflects that a probate is mandatorily required for a will made by 
a Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, or Jaina, residing within the limits of West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, 
Assam, Madras, or Mumbai, or if property is situated therein. The provisions relating to probate 
do not apply to Muslims.
When a probate is applied for, and the will proved to be genuine, the executor is 
provided with a certificate proving that it is genuine. A probate is relevant for various reasons 
including for proving the title to an asset in the hands of a beneficiary or legatee. 
5.3.2.3. Obtaining a Probate 
The procedure to obtain probate is to be handled with great caution by a qualified 
Advocate. A probate will be granted by a competent court of law having jurisdiction, and 
requires the Advocate to deal with the court and its authorities and officers. 
Different states have different procedures to applying for and obtaining probate. Such 
procedure is usually set out in Court rules and the procedure of a testamentary suit is laid out 
30 Section 318 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
31 MANU/MH/0012/2017
32 Shernaz Faroukh Lawyer and Ors. vs. Manek Daru Sukhadwala MANU/MH/0012/2017
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 55
by the Civil Procedure Code, 1908. For example, in the city of Mumbai, the procedure for 
obtaining probate is set out in the Bombay High Court Rules. 
Typically, a petition for probate must contain a schedule of properties and credits and 
a schedule of debts of the deceased, and is accompanied by documents such as the 
executor’s oath, affidavits of consent of legal heirs, and an affidavit of at least one attesting 
witness (if available). The value of assets of deceased are mentioned and annexed to the 
petition. The value of properties movable and immovable is distinguished separately to 
ascertain the net value in Indian Rupees (INR).
The court must be satisfied that the will propounded is the final will and testament and 
there is no other. The above affidavit of the attesting witness is submitted as evidentiary 
documentation and a notice is published and served so as to invite claims by creditors and 
heirs. The Court will also verify that the executor is the person that is authorised under the will 
and not any other person. 
5.3.3. Establish solvency of the estate, pay expenses, pay off debt on priority
After grant of a probate or letters of administration the executor’s or administrator’s 
role, after taking inventory and assessing the value of the deceased’s estate, is to follow the 
rules set out in the ISA whilst distributing the estate. Sections 321 to 325 lay down an order in 
which the estate of the deceased is to be apportioned, in which expenses take priority over 
debts. These are, firstly, expenses incurred on funeral ceremonies, death-bed charges 
including medical attendance and stay for one month preceding death, that are payable33
. 
Secondly, expenses of obtaining probate and costs that may be incurred in respect of judicial 
proceedings necessary to administer estate, are to be paid34. Thirdly, wages due to any 
labourer, artisan or domestic servant, for services rendered within three months of death, are 
to be paid. And lastly, other debts according to their respective priorities35. Debts are to be 
paid before payment of legacies36
.
The executor may thereafter move a petition for permission to distribute what is left of 
the decedent's assets to the beneficiaries named in the will. This usually requires the court's 
permission, which is typically only granted after the executor has submitted a complete 
accounting of every financial transaction they have engaged in throughout the probate 
process. Save as aforesaid, no creditor shall have a right of priority over another; but the 
executor or administrator shall pay all such debts as he knows of, including his own, equally 
and in proportion as far as the assets of the deceased will extend.
33 Section 321 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
34 Section 322 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
35 Section 323 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
36 Section 325 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 56
5.3.4. Ancillary Duties & Responsibilities of an Executor or Administrator
(a). Honour specific legacies and proportionate general legacies in the manner prescribed 
by the ISA.
(b). Provide funds for the performance of funeral ceremonies of the deceased, provided 
that there is enough estate left for such purpose37
.
(c). Collect the property of the deceased and the debts that were due to him at the time he 
was living, with reasonable and due diligence.38
(d). Preparing and filing tax returns and paying taxes out of the estate. This may require 
the executor to liquidate assets. 
5.4. Chapter Review Questions
1. Who is an executor?
2. Who can be an administrator?
3. What is the difference between an administrator and an executor?
4. Enumerate the powers and duties of an executor.
5. What is probate? Who can grant probate? 
6. Is a probate compulsory?
37 Section 316 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
38 Section 319 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 57
Chapter 6: Tenancy-in-Common and 
Joint Tenancy, Transmission & 
Nomination
Learning Objectives 
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
6-1 Understand joint tenancy and tenancy-in-common in relation to holding of, and 
succession to, immovable property.
6-2 Understand the effect of joint holding, and nomination, in relation to the management 
and transmission of securities and investments.
6-3Understand the effect of nominations made in relation to holdings in a co-operative 
society ownership structure.
Topics 
6.1. Tenancy-in-Common and Joint Tenancy
6.2. Contracts – Holdings on any/either or survivor basis in bank accounts, mutual funds and 
securities 
6.2.1. Bank Accounts
6.2.2. Mutual Funds
6.2.3. Securities 
6.3. Nomination in Life Insurance Policies
6.4. Nomination in Housing Societies
6.5. Married Women’s Property Act and Estate Planning
6.6. Other Tools for Estate Planning – Power of Attorney
6.6.1. Powers of Attorney, its use and purpose
6.6.2. Types of Power of Attorney - general and special
6.6.3. Revocation of PoA
6.6.4. Limitations of PoA holder
6.6.5. PoA executed abroad
6.7. Chapter Review Questions
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 58
6.1. Tenants-in-Common and Joint Tenancy
Co-ownership is when two or more persons hold joint title to an immovable property. 
A co-owner has an inherent entitlement to possession, the right to use and enjoy and the right 
to dispose of such interest. Section 44 of TOPA39, being the governing federal law in respect 
of transfers of immovable property, applies to co-owners transfers. When a share in property 
is transferred by one co-owner, the transferee will, unless otherwise agreed, acquire the same 
right as held by the transferor, including right to joint possession or enjoyment of the property 
and right to demand partition, subject to one exception therein, being the transferee of a share 
of a dwelling house belonging to an undivided family, who not a member of the family, in which 
case such transferee is not entitled to joint possession or other common or part enjoyment of 
such dwelling house. 
However, the manner in which co-owners jointly own a property, and the passing of 
such shares, by succession or inheritance, is determined by whether they hold the property 
as tenants-in-common or as joint tenants.
Tenancy in common 
When two or more persons jointly own a property as 'tenants-in-common' each coowner: (i) has a distinct interest in the property, (ii) may possess and enjoy the property, unless 
otherwise agreed, and (iii) may freely transfer his interest in the property. Further, on the death 
of a co-owner, his interest in the property will devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, 
as the case may be, to his/her heir(s) or beneficiary(ies).
Joint-tenancy 
Essentially, joint tenants may jointly use and enjoy a property, unless otherwise 
agreed. However, the joint tenant is deemed to have an unspecified share, and the joint 
tenants hold a single unified interest in the property. Such interest cannot be bequeathed, and 
on death, the interest of the deceased co-owner will pass, by survivorship, to the surviving coowner. A joint tenant cannot bequeath his share in the property by will, and it will not pass by 
intestate succession to his heirs. A joint tenancy may be severed by a subsequent mutual 
agreement between the co-owners, whereby the co-owners agree to hold the same in 
specified shares as tenants-in-common.
The following requirements need to be fulfilled for creation of a joint tenancy:
(a). specific language in an instrument reflecting the intent to create a joint tenancy. 
Accordingly, if not specified in an instrument of transfer, or will, or agreement, as to how coowners hold, or will hold, a property, that is, as joint tenants or as tenants in common, the 
position will be that they hold, or will hold, as tenants-in-common.
(b). the interest of joint tenants must vest at the same time. 
39 Section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882: Transfer by one co-owner- where one of two or more co-owners 
of immovable property legally competent in that behalf transfers his share of such property or any interest therein, 
the transferee acquires as to such shares or interest, and so far as is necessary to give, effect to the transfer, the 
transferor’s right to joint possession or other common or part enjoyment of the property, and to enforce a partition 
of the same, but subject to the conditions and liabilities affecting at the date of the transfer, the share or interest so 
transferred. Where the transferee of a share of a dwelling house belonging to an undivided family is not a member 
of the family, nothing in this section shall be deemed to entitle him to joint possession or other common or part 
enjoyment of the house.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 59
(c). joint tenants must have undivided interests in the whole property and not separated or 
divided interests. 
(d). joint tenants must derive their interest by the same instrument. 
(e). each joint tenant must have estates of the same type and same duration. 
A joint tenancy may be created by will or by agreement. In the case of death of a joint 
tenant, his interest will devolve by survivorship, that is, devolves on the surviving joint tenants 
and not the deceased joint tenant’s heirs. 
A clear distinction between the concept of joint tenancy and tenants in common was 
dealt with by the Orissa High Court in Shridhar Ghose v Harimohan Sahu40 where the 
distinction was drawn, on the basis of the mode of creation of the interest in the property, that 
is, whether there is severance of shares amongst the co-owners, and devolution of interest of 
a deceased co-owner.
The terms ‘tenancy-in-common’ and ‘joint tenancy’ are also been dealt with in Chapter 2. 
6.2. Contracts- Holding on any/either or survivor basis in bank accounts, mutual 
funds and securities
6.2.1. Bank Accounts
While an individual/single bank account is prevalent in India, joint accounts may be 
preferred in certain cases, that is when two or more persons hold the account jointly. A joint 
account may have any of the following modes of operation: 
Either or Survivor
An account where there are two account holders, each of whom may operate it. The 
first holder is deemed to be the primary account holder. Should one joint holder die, the other 
(as survivor) will become the sole holder and may continue to operate the account. After 
demise of both holders, a nominee, if any, is entitled to claim the funds in the account, and the 
account will be closed.
Anyone or Survivor
This is akin to the ‘either or survivor’ account holding, but the account will have more 
than two joint holders, any of whom can operate. In such a case, death of a joint holder will 
not affect the account and the surviving joint holders will continue the account. If they close 
the account, the amount credited would be distributed amongst them. An example of this 
account would be a person who opens an account with his/her all family members. A 
nomination can also be made in respect of this account, which contemplates who the funds 
credited will go to post the death of all joint holders.
40 AIR 1964 Ori 141
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 60
Former or Survivor
Only the primary account holder may operate an account while he/she is alive. The 
second/joint holder may operate only after the death of the primary holder. 
Latter or Survivor
Converse of the previous account, where only the secondary account holder may 
operate an account while he/she is alive. The primary holder would be entitled to operate the 
account only after the death of the secondary holder. 
Jointly Held Account 
The account will be operated by both or all holders together. In other words, consent, 
presence, and signature of all holders is required for operations. If any joint holder dies, the 
account will be non-operational and closed. 
Jointly or Survivor
Similar to the ‘Jointly Held Account’ mode, where both or all holders will operate jointly; 
the difference being that after the death of a holder, the joint account will not close. In such 
case surviving account holder(s) may continue the account, or receive the balance and close 
it, at their option.
Minor’s Account 
More than being a joint account, it is statutorily required in case of a minor holding an 
account that an adult or guardian is joint holder and operate the same during the minority of 
the child.
Comparative Table of modes of Operation
Joint Accounts
Sr. Nature Number of 
Holders
Operation Beneficiary(ies) on 
Death 
1. Either or Survivor Two Both Survivor
2. Anyone or Survivor More than Two All Survivors
3. Former or Survivor Two First Holder Second holder
4. Latter or Survivor Two Second Holder First Holder
6. Jointly Held Account Two or more All together Survivor(s)
7. Jointly or Survivor Two or more All together Survivor(s)
8. Minor Account Two or more Adult(s) or 
Guardian(s)
Survivor(s) 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 61
6.2.2. Mutual Funds
Mutual fund units may be held solely, or jointly, with a maximum of three holders. The 
mode of operation may be either or survivor, any or survivor, or jointly. Minors cannot be joint 
holders of units.
All communications and payments (dividends, redemptions, etc.) are made to the first 
holder. If units are held in dematerialized form (that is, in a Demat account), the rules of the 
depository will apply to operations.
Either or survivor operations entitle either holder to effect transactions. In case of ‘any 
or survivor’ operations, any unit holder effect a transaction. In a joint holding, all holders must 
join in effecting a transaction. 
Irrespective of the mode of holding, a request for a nomination must be made by all 
joint holders. The right of joint holder(s) is superior to a nominee, and a nominee will be entitled 
to the units only on the death of the holder, or if there are more than one, then on the death of 
all holders. 
In a joint holding, units will pass, by ‘transmission’, to the surviving joint holder(s), if 
one of the joint holders dies. The term ‘transmission’ is the process by which units of a 
deceased unit holder are transferred to the surviving (joint) unitholders. The asset 
management company or AMC would require various documents including a death certificate, 
to be submitted for effecting the transmission.
If there are no joint holders then units would be transmitted to the nominee(s), if any. 
If there are no joint holders, and no nominees, transmission would be in favour of legal heir(s). 
However, this process would require, in addition to a death certificate and other documents 
as referred above, the submission of a probate, or letters of administration, or succession 
certificate. 
Notwithstanding any joint holding, or nomination, a unit holder is entitled to bequeath 
mutual fund units by will (subject to the applicable law of succession).
6.2.3. Securities 
Transmission of securities is transfer of ownership to a nominee, or successor, or legal 
heir, on death of the owner/holder. 
The Securities and Exchange Board of India, being the capital market regulator (SEBI) 
under its circular dated January 4, 2019, required transmission of securities in dematerialized 
form to be dealt with in accordance with the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing 
Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) (Sixth Amendment) Regulations, 2018 (SEBI 
LODR) in order to harmonize the procedure for transmission in dematerialised form, with 
transmission of securities in physical form. 
Broadly, under SEBI LODR:
(a). a succession certificate, or probate, or letters of administration, or court decree, 
as may be applicable, in terms of the ISA is prescribed as a documentary requirement 
for transmission of securities held in physical mode.
(b). On death of a sole account holder, or a joint holder, of shares in dematerialized 
form, the surviving joint holder(s), or nominee(s) or legal heir(s) would be required to 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 62
approach the Depository Participant (DP) with the requisite paperwork for transmission 
of such shares. However, if the shares were in physical form, each company in which 
such shares were held would have to be approached for transmission. 
(c). If a person leaves physical shares held jointly, the shares would pass to the 
surviving joint holder. However, the shares are held solely, then the procedure for 
transmission will depend on whether the person has made a nomination or not, and 
whether there is a probate, succession certificate or letters of administration.
(d). If there is a nomination made in respect of the shares, the nominee would have 
to submit a transmission request form and attach a death certificate attested by a 
notary. 
(e). If there is no nomination, then a duly stamped affidavit executed by all legal 
heirs, or by the identified legal heir would have to be executed if there is a probate, or 
succession certificate, or letters of administration, obtained.
(f). If there is no nominee, and no will, and shares held solely by a person, then, if 
the value of such shares per listed company does not exceed INR 200,000, a simple 
no-objection certificate is required from all legal heirs in favour of the claimant to such 
shares, or alternatively a family settlement executed and notarized by all legal heirs of 
the deceased, each of which must be submitted together with an indemnity bond. 
6.3. Nomination in Life Insurance Policies
Nomination is a process that enables a policyholder to appoint an individual i.e. the 
nominee, who can claim the proceeds of the policy, on death of the policyholder. 
Section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938 deals with nomination and provides that a policyholder 
holding life insurance on his own life, may nominate a person or persons to whom the money 
secured by the policy shall be paid on death.
A nomination can be made either at the time of buying the policy, or at any time before 
the policy matures. A nomination may be changed during the term of the policy. Such change 
should be communicated by the policyholder to the insurer and updated in its records. Where 
a nomination is cancelled or altered by an endorsement, or a bequest is made under a will, a 
notice of such change in nomination should be submitted to the insurer, as the insurer is not 
liable for any payment made under the policy to a nominee of the policy or registered in records 
of the insurer. 
If a nominee is a minor, a guardian/appointee, other than the policyholder himself, has 
to be appointed for it to be effective, and the name of such nominee must be endorsed upon 
the policy itself, based on the name of the nominee mentioned in the proposal form. However, 
a nomination, if not made at the proposal stage, can be made by way of an endorsement in 
the policy subsequently on notice to the insurer. On the receipt of such notice, the insurer will 
register the nomination and make an endorsement on the policy document.
When a policy matures during the lifetime of the policyholder or where the nominee 
dies before the policy matures for payment, the amount secured by the policy is payable to 
the policyholder, or his heirs or legal representatives or the holder of a probate, or letters of 
administration, or succession certificate. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 63
The position, in law, of a nominee of an insurance policy, has been set out in Smt. 
Sarabati Devi & Ors. vs. Usha Devi41 where the Supreme Court held that a mere nomination 
made under section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938 does not have the effect of conferring on 
the nominee any beneficial interest in the proceeds of the policy on the death of the assured, 
as nomination only indicates the hand which is authorised to receive the amount, on the 
payment of which the insurer gets a valid discharge of its liability under the policy. The amount, 
however, can be claimed by the heirs of the assured in accordance with the applicable law of 
succession.
The Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015, introduced the concept of beneficial 
nominee. The nominee in this case is the person who ultimately benefits or owns the insurance 
money. Pursuant to this amendment, when a policyholder nominates parents, spouse or 
children, then the nominee or nominees will be beneficially entitled to the amount payable by 
the insurer. The law also includes reference to rights of a nominee to collect the insurance 
money on maturity, in the event of the policyholder’s death.
6.4. Nomination in Housing Societies 
The law governing co-operative societies is state-specific, and consequently each 
state will usually have its law, and rules and procedure for nomination, by members of cooperative societies, in respect of their shares and premises. For example, the State of 
Maharashtra has the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act 1960, which allows a member 
to nominate person(s) to whom his shares and interest in the society will be transferred by the 
society on death.
Unless the state co-operative law expressly provides to the contrary, nomination does 
not create a new rule of succession, and therefore a nominee will not acquire title/ownership 
on death of the owner. A nominee is considered a trustee who has legal control over the 
property, on behalf of legal heirs, and remains in charge until the court decides as to who is 
entitled to it by relevant laws of succession.
The object of nomination is to avoid confusion in the event of disputes between heirs 
and legal representatives and to uncertainty as to with whom the society should deal with. It 
is highly advisable to make a nomination even in case of joint ownership if both owners die at 
once. 
The Supreme Court, in Indrani Wahi v Registrar of Co-operative Societies & Ors42
observed that a transfer to a nominee would have no relevance as to the issue of title between 
the legal heirs or successors to the property of the deceased and it would also open to them 
to pursue their case of inheritance in consonance with the law.
6.5. Married Women’s Property Act and Estate Planning
Under MWP Act, 1874, all the properties that belong to the married women get 
insulated and protected from all court attachments or any income tax department attachments
that the husband has run up.
41 1984 AIR SC 346
42 Indrani Wahi v Registrar of Co-operative Societies & Ors AIR 2016 SC 1969
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 64
Business people and salaried individuals with loans or liabilities, or people who want 
to protect their wife/children from creditors or relatives who might have fraudulent intentions
should opt for the MWP Act. This is also an excellent solution for a joint family setup, wherein 
there could be several complications in the ownership of property thereby increasing the scope 
of family disputes. In all such cases, a policy covered under the MWP Act gives a clear title to 
the beneficiary.
6.6. Other Tools for Estate Planning – Power of Attorney
Power of Attorney, its use and purpose
The Power of Attorney Act, 1882 defines Power of Attorney as “any instrument 
empowering a specified person to act for and in the name of the person executing it”. Power 
of attorney can be considered as a legal instrument which is granted to a person, thereby 
giving the person an authority to make a decision, or a set of decisions for the principal in 
defined matters (banking, legal, financial investment, business and other purposes). In other 
words, it enables such person to act as an agent for the principal by establishing a principalagent relationship between the two through a legally binding contract.
Need of Power of Attorney
Situations may arise in the lifetime of an individual or a person where it becomes very 
difficult to look after one’s business, professional and legal affairs. The reasons can be old 
age, poor health or disability of an individual. Other reasons can be more nuanced such as 
geographical inaccessibility to perform certain decision making and documentation necessary 
for the progression of a business or professional affair or a lack of expertise in certain domain. 
Business entities may issue power of attorney to its officials to perform professional activities 
and day-to-day legal/regulatory compliances. Power of attorney acts as a legal tool for 
authorizing confidants, professionals and officials for them to perform routine matters or 
specified duties related to property, business or financial transactions and medical care of the 
Principal on its behalf.
Types of Power of Attorney
There are two types of Power of Attorney, basis its application. A General Power of 
Attorney gives wide-ranging powers to the attorney or the agent and authorizes it to do all acts 
connected with a particular trade, business or employment. For example – say A is the 
manager of B’s firm. Under a General Power of Attorney, A’s authority extends to doing of 
everything that is necessary for carrying out the business of B’s firm.
A Special Power of Attorney gives only specific powers to the attorney or the agent 
and therefore authorizes them to do only a single act. For example – say A is employed by B, 
residing in Mumbai to recover a debt due to B in Delhi. A may adopt any legal process 
necessary for the purpose of recovering debt. Once the debt is recovered, the Special Power 
of Attorney ceases to exist, and is deemed to terminate. 
Agents represent the Principal in all property and financial matters as long as the 
Principal’s state of mind is good. In situations where the Principal becomes incapacitated in 
making decisions, the PoA agreement would deem to end automatically. If the Principal wants 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 65
the PoA to remain in effect after the person’s health deteriorates, a durable power of attorney 
needs to be entered into. 
Revocation of Power of Attorney
Power of Attorney can be revocable or irrevocable based on the clauses of the deed
executed. In a revocable PoA, the Power of Attorney is revocable at the will of the principal, 
while in an irrevocable PoA it is not revocable at the will of the principal.
The procedure for revocation has been drawn from the Indian Contract Act, 1872. 
There can be several cases in a principal-agent relationship where the relationship may be 
severed between the attorney and the authorizer. As per Section 201 of the Act, some of the 
conditions for revocation are:
• If either the Principal or the Power of Attorney holder or both become unsound of
mind, die or is/are adjudicated as insolvent by the court.
• If the Power of Attorney holder renounces his powers.
• If the business for which the Power of Attorney was granted gets completed.
Further, applying the general principles given under the law to a Power of Attorney, 
the ways through which such revocation can take place could be:
• Breach of Contract – In case of any gross mismanagement or any breach of duty on 
behalf of the agent, or if it acts beyond its scope of powers as specified in the PoA, the 
Power of Attorney can be revoked.
• Agent’s interest in the Agency – Section 202 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 is 
applicable to situations wherein the agent develops a personal interest in its agency. 
In such case, the Power of Attorney cannot be terminated without the due consent of 
such an agent.
• Actions of the Principal – The Principal brings the relationship to an end through an 
express revocation of the authority granted to an agent.
Procedure to Revoke Power of Attorney
Revocation of a PoA is generally done by first issuing a notice in a local daily 
newspaper or in a national daily. The Principal will have to get a registered cancellation deed
(registered from the office of the respective sub-registrar), and provide a copy for due 
information of such cancellation to the Agent. 
Limitations of Power of Attorney
A Power of Attorney could leave the Principal vulnerable to abuse by entrusting with the Agent
a lot of authority over the Principal’s money, property, and decision-making power. The Agent 
has a fiduciary duty to act in Principal’s best interests. 
The errors and omissions in creating a legally valid PoA exposes the Principal to unintended 
risks which do not have a legal recourse to address later. Undue authority ceded to an Agent 
or not specifying the contours of decision-making in money matters and financial affairs may 
lead to loss of control. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 66
A Power of Attorney also does not address what happens to the assets of the Principal after
his or her death. The PoA deems to end upon the Principal’s death, and so it does not do 
anything to protect Principal’s wealth or its intended distribution. 
Power of Attorney executed abroad
Power of Attorney is a perfect instrument for people living abroad and managing assets 
in India. A PoA can be executed from abroad in two ways:
Legalisation:
In this case, signatures of the notary or judge before whom the PoA is executed are required 
to be authenticated by the duly accredited representative of the Indian Embassy/Consulate. 
According to Section 3 of the Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Oaths and Fees) Act, 1948, 
notarising a deed from an authorized officer of the Indian Consulate/Embassy would be 
considered a valid notary. Such a PoA is not required to be stamped at the time of execution. 
However, it needs to be stamped within three months from the date of receipt of the PoA in 
India.
Apostalisation:
The deed of PoA executed outside India is proven through an apostalisation process which is 
governed by The Hague Convention, 1961. Also known as super legalisation, apostille is a 
certificate which confirms and verifies the signature/seal of the person who authenticated the 
document. However, this deed too needs to comply with the Indian laws such as the Indian 
Registration Act, 1908, and the Power of Attorney Act, 1882.
6.7. Chapter Review Questions
1. Comment on the principal difference between a tenancy in common and a joint 
tenancy.
2. What is ‘transmission’ in relation to mutual funds?
3. What are the legal requirements for transmission of shares credited to a Demat 
account, of a sole holder?
4. How is a nomination treated under the Insurance Act, 1938?
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 67
Chapter 7: Gifts, Trusts & Family 
Arrangements in Estate Planning 
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
7-1 Understand basic law relating to gifts of movable and immovable property
7.2 Distinguish between different types of trusts.
7-3 Understand the advantages of adopting a trust vehicle of estate planning.
7-4 Understand the value of trust structures in small/family businesses.
7-5 Understand family arrangements and settlements and their role in estate planning
Topics
7.1. Gifts
7.1.1. Inheritance Tax
7.1.2. Tax on Gifts
7.1.2.1. Moveable Property – Fair Market Value
7.1.2.2. Immovable Property – Stamp Duty
7.2. The Indian Trusts Act,1882
7.2.1. Definitions
7.2.2. Types of Trusts
7.2.2.1. Testamentary & Non-Testamentary Trusts
7.2.2.2. Public, Charitable or Religious Trusts & Private Trusts
7.2.2.3. Revocable & Irrevocable Trusts
7.2.2.4. Non-Discretionary & Discretionary Trusts
7.3. Advantages of Private Trusts
7.3.1. Planning succession
7.3.2. Ring fencing of assets
7.3.3. Tax planning
7.3.4. Protecting persons with special needs
7.3.5. Flexibility 
7.3.6. Transparency in management
7.3.7. Strategic objectives 
7.3.8. Trust as a Pass-through entity 
7.4. Exception – HUF Property 
7.5. Succession planning for small businesses
7.6. Business succession 
7.7. Offshore Trusts
7.8. Family Arrangements
7.9. Chapter Review Questions 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 68
7.1. Gifts
Section 122 of TOPA defines gift as a voluntary transfer of property inter vivos (that is 
between living persons), without compensation or any type of consideration. While a gift has 
to be voluntary, and for no consideration, it need not be made out of natural love and affection. 
Sections 123 to 129 of TOPA deal with transfers by gift, registration, revocation, and other 
matters.
A gift will effect a transfer of the entire ownership over the property, or interest therein 
that has been gifted, and donor cedes title completely. However, in the case of immovable 
properties, a donor may retain and reserve reasonable fetters during his lifetime, including 
restrictions on alienation, and/or a life interest, that is, a right of residence to the donor and 
has family members.
An instrument of gift is executed by a donor (the giver of the gift) and a donee (the 
recipient of the gift) under which movable or immoveable property is transferred.
If an immovable property above the value of INR 100 is to be gifted, the instrument of 
gift is required to be compulsorily registered. The instrument of gift must also be attested by 
two witnesses in addition to the donor and must record acceptance by the donee of the gift. 
While a gift may be effected by delivery, it is advisable to record the same in writing. 
The writing will be optionally registrable. As with immovable property, there has to be an 
acceptance of the gift, by or on behalf of the donee. Acceptance may be express or implied. 
However, it must be done during the lifetime of the donor, and while he is still legally capable 
of giving the gift. If a donee dies before accepting a gift, it is void43
. 
Other Matters Related To Gifts 
(a). A gift by a minor is void, as a minor is not considered capable of contracting. A natural 
guardian of the minor can accept a gift made to a minor on his behalf, on the condition 
that the person nominated in the gift deed will act as a manager of the gifted property.
(b). A gift cannot be revoked once it is made, except under section 126 of the TOPA.44
(c). Mohammedan law permits, with certain conditions, an oral gift to be made of 
immovable property, is known as ‘Hiba’. 
43 Section 122 of Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
44 Section 126 of Transfer of Property Act, 1882: When gift may be suspended or revoked - The donor and donee 
may agree that on the happening of any specified event which does not depend on the will of the donor a gift shall 
be suspended or revoked; but a gift which the parties agree shall be revocable wholly or in part, at the mere will of 
the donor, is void wholly or in part, as the case may be. A gift may also be revoked in any of the cases (save want 
or failure of consideration) in which, if it were a contract, it might be rescinded. Save as aforesaid, a gift cannot be 
revoked. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the rights of transferees for consideration 
without notice.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 69
7.1.1. Inheritance Tax 
Inheritance tax is typically levied on the value of assets received by legal heirs by 
inheritance (that is, both testamentary and intestate succession). Inheritance tax (known as 
‘Estate Duty’) was abolished in 1985. At present there is no inheritance tax in India.
7.1.2. Tax on Gifts
Gifts are taxable, subject to certain exemptions based on value of the gift, relationship 
between donor and donee. Under the IT Act, any amount received by an individual person or 
a HUF over Rs. 50,000/- in a financial year from an unrelated person, in cash or by way of 
credit, will be included as income. If the value of all the gifts taken together exceeds Rs 50,000, 
then, the aggregate of the gifts received become taxable without any threshold exemption. 
Similar to inheritance being not taxable, money received in contemplation of death of an 
individual or Karta or member of a HUF is also exempt from Income Tax.
Tax exemptions are provided in respect of gifts between close relatives. Consequently, 
the gift of any asset (movable or immovable) made to certain specified relatives, is exempt 
from income tax in the hand of the recipient, without limit. Close relatives includes parents, 
children, spouse, siblings, siblings of the spouse, lineal ascendants and descendants of the 
person and his/her spouse. The list also includes spouse of the abovementioned persons.
Under section 56(2) of the IT Act, if an asset is gifted to certain specified relatives 
during a person’s lifetime, there is no tax liability for the beneficiary. Similarly, any asset that 
is willed or inherited by the beneficiary is free of tax. Further, gifts received are taxable in the 
hands of recipient under the head “income from other sources” and there is no taxation for the 
donor. In this case gift means any sum of money, moveable property or immovable property 
which is received without consideration.
In Smt Geeta Dubey vs. Income-tax Officer45
, Dubey ( Assessee) received a gift of Rs 
50,000 from her father and a gift of Rs 50,000 from her sister-in-law. The assessing officer 
examined this receipt and during the assessment proceedings, the assesse had established 
the identity of both the abovementioned donors and also proved that the gifts were received 
through proper banking channels. Further, the officer also accepted the fact that since these 
were receipts from the Assessee’s father and sister-in-law, they qualified as “relatives” under 
section 56 of the IT Act. However, the assessing officer contended that the gifts would be 
subject to income tax since the occasion for which the gift was received was not declared by 
the Assesse. The same contention was upheld by the Commissioner of Income-Tax (Appeals). 
The issue was then raised for consideration before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 
(“ITAT”). The ITAT ruled that since the identity of the donors had been established and as 
they qualified as relatives for the taxpayer to claim an exemption, the need to prove by an 
explanation on the occasion for which gift was received, was not mandatory. 
45 (2018) 172 ITD 538 (Indore) (Trib.)
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 70
7.1.2.1. Movable Property – Fair Market Value 
Fair market value is the price at which property changes hands between a willing 
buyer and a willing seller, neither being under any compulsion to buy or to sell, and both having 
reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. Section (22B) of the IT Act defines “Fair Market 
Value” (FMV) as "the price that the capital asset would ordinarily fetch on sale in the open 
market on the relevant date”. To summarise, FMV is the price that an asset will sell on the 
open market. An asset's FMV should represent an accurate valuation or assessment of its 
worth. In respect of gifts, FMV is an important figure to arrive at for determination of the tax 
liability on such gift.
Determination of FMV for inventory as per the Income Tax Rules
Rule 11UAB, which came into force from April 1, 2019 and applies in relation with 
prospective effect to subsequent years provides for determination of FMV of different classes 
of assets/inventory converted into or treated as capital assets in the following manner (for the 
purpose of computation for section 28 of the IT Act):
(a). Immovable property (land or building or both): value adopted or assessed or 
assessable by any authority of the Central Government or a State Government for the 
purpose of stamp duty on the date on which the inventory is converted into, or treated, 
as a capital asset;
(b). For jewellery, archaeological collections, drawings, paintings, sculptures, any work of 
art, shares or securities referred to in rule 11UA: value determined in the manner 
provided in sub-rule (1) of rule 11UA and for this purpose the reference to the valuation 
date in the rule 11U and rule 11UA shall be the date on which the inventory is converted 
into, or treated, as a capital asset;
(c). For other property: price that it would ordinarily fetch on sale in the open market on the 
date on which the inventory is converted into, or treated, as a capital asset.
7.1.2.2. Immovable Property – Stamp Duty 
The Indian Stamp Act, 1899 is a federal law governing stamp duty in India. However, 
stamp duty being a State subject, each State has either enacted a separate state law for the 
charge and recovery of stamp duty, or has adopted the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, with Statespecific amendments. 
Stamp duty is, inter alia, chargeable upon instruments of transfer of property, and is, 
in most cases, levied ad valorem, that is on the basis of market value of the subject property. 
Rates of stamp duty will vary from state to state, and in cases of immovable properties will 
depend on factors such as the nature of the property, development potential, the user of the 
property, the age and location of, and the amenities related to, the property. Concessions are 
available to certain classes of persons and properties. 
It is relevant to know that stamp duty is a tax levied on an instrument, and not a 
transaction, or property. If an instrument is required to be stamped and is not, it would not be 
admissible in legal proceedings as evidence. An unstamped and unregistered instrument of 
transfer will not pass title to the property. A gift deed consisting of immovable property attracts 
stamp duty.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 71
Stamp Duty implications on a Gift
An instrument of gift will typically attract stamp duty in India. Rates will vary from state 
to state. An unstamped instrument of gift will not be ordered for registration, and an 
unregistered gift is void.
7.2. The Indian Trusts Act, 1882
The Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (ITA) is the principal statute governing private trusts. It 
includes provisions in relation to the creation and formation of trusts, types of trusts, the parties 
to a trust, rights and liabilities of trustees and beneficiaries, and the requirements of a valid 
trust deed. 
The ITA does not apply to a waqf and religious or charitable endowments under 
Mohammedan Law or the “mutual relations of members of an undivided family as determined 
by any customary or personal law”. State-specific legislation has been enacted by some states 
in respect of charitable and religious trusts, endowments, etc., which do not apply to private 
trusts.
Section 3 of the ITA defines a trust as “an obligation annexed to the ownership of 
property and arising out of a confidence reposed in and accepted by the owner, or declared 
and accepted by him, for the benefit of another, or of another and the owner”. Therefore, a 
trust is an agreement between two persons, under which property of one is held by the other, 
usually for the benefit of a third party (beneficiary). 
7.2.1. Definitions 
Author/Settlor 
A person who creates a trust of property owned by him is called the ‘author’ or ‘settlor’ 
of the trust. A settlor can decide upon the manner/mode and purpose of formation of the trust, 
names and number of trustees, the beneficiaries, and matters concerning management and 
administration of the trust. The settlor transfers to the trustees, the property which will be 
initially held on trust, that is, trust property or corpus as referred below.
Trustee 
A person that holds and manages trust property for the benefit of a beneficiary is known 
as its ‘trustee’. Any person capable of contracting (that is, who has attained the legal age of 
majority, being of sound mind and not disqualified by law) may act as a trustee. A trustee may 
be a living person or an artificial entity including a corporation firm, bank or other institution. 
There are also entities formed with the specific objective of assisting in establishing and 
managing trusts, and who act as trustees, known as ‘professional trustees’.
A trustee acts in a fiduciary capacity, in that he will manage the trust, and hold, deal 
with and administer trust property and income of the trust, for the benefit of its beneficiaries; 
but not for the trustee’s own benefit. A trustee, in such fiduciary capacity, holds legal title and 
ownership of trust property, both movable and immovable. Chapter III sets out the duties and 
liabilities of trustees. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 72
Protector
A settlor may not desire to be a trustee, whether for maintaining legal separation or for 
legal and tax reasons. However, for ensuring the trust is managed and administered by the 
trustees in accordance with the trust deed, and for safeguarding the interests of its 
beneficiaries, a settlor may retain oversight and control by assuming the position of, or 
appointing another person, as ‘protector’ of the trust. A protector may possess certain 
overriding or material powers under the trust deed, including removal or replacement of 
trustees and approval right over the disposal or investment of trust properties and application 
of the trust income. However, the trustees continue to be the primary functionaries of a trust 
and they alone hold the trust property.
Beneficiary 
A beneficiary is the person for whom the trust is created, and who typically receives 
income arising from the trust. A beneficiary may be an individual, group, body or association 
of persons, and even an artificial entity. The only requirement is that a beneficiary must be a 
person capable of holding property, which includes minors, persons who are disabled 
(mentally or physically) persons, and unborn children. Beneficiaries possess certain rights and 
liabilities under Chapter VI. 
Trust Property
The property transferred by a settlor for the benefit of the beneficiaries of the trust, is 
called ‘trust property’, or ‘corpus’, or the ‘trust fund’. Accretions to, and income arising out of, 
trust property, may also be included, if the trust deed provides. Trust property can be settled 
upon the trust by the settlor, and can be added to, from time to time, by the settlor and/or any 
other persons, through donations and gifts, if the trust deed provides. If a trust is irrevocable, 
a settlor cedes title and control over property settled upon the trust. 
Trust Deed
Section 3 defines a trust deed as the “instrument, if any, by which the Trust is declared”. 
A trust deed will typically contain provisions setting out the rights, powers and obligations of 
the trustees, the manner in which trust property and income will be dealt with, invested and 
applied, beneficiary distributions, successor beneficiaries, replacement and removal of and 
appointment of successor trustees, and the date of termination of the trust and distribution of 
the trust fund amongst beneficiaries. 
7.2.2. Types of Trusts
7.2.2.1. Testamentary & Non-Testamentary Trusts
A testamentary trust is created under a will, and comes into existence effect after the 
testator’s death. 
A trust created during the settlor’s lifetime is a non-testamentary trust and is usually 
created under an instrument. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 73
7.2.2.2. Public, Charitable or Religious Trusts & Private Trusts
Public Trust
A public trust is created for the benefit of the public, or a section of the public. It may 
be religious or charitable in nature. The nature of a public trust is determined by its 
beneficiaries. As public trusts may have altruistic objects, they may be conferred tax 
exemptions and benefits. A public trust may continue in perpetuity or for an indefinite period.
Private Trust
Any trust which is not a public trust is considered as a private trust. Private trusts 
cannot exist indefinitely as they are governed by the rule against perpetuity. 
7.2.2.3. Revocable & Irrevocable Trusts
Revocable Trust
A trust in which the settlor has expressly reserved the right of revocation or reassumption of the trust property is known as a revocable trust. A revocable trust may not ringfence assets and the assets of the trust may be attached in recovery of the settlor’s of debts 
under law. In addition, assets transferred to a trust by a settlor would continue to be treated 
as the settlor’s assets, under income tax law. 
Irrevocable Trust
An irrevocable trust is one where the settlor has no right to re-assume trust property, 
and the trust deed cannot be revoked or amended. In an irrevocable trust, the settlor cedes 
the ownership and control over trust property and on his death will not form part of his estate. 
7.2.2.4. Non-Discretionary & Discretionary Trusts 
Non-Discretionary Trusts
A trust in which the beneficiaries and/or their shares are also determined is known as 
a non-discretionary trust, or a determinate, or specific trust. Trustees do not have any 
discretion over the distribution of the benefits and income of such trust, amongst beneficiaries.
Discretionary Trust
A trust in which beneficiaries are not named and/or their beneficial shares not stated 
is a discretionary trust. Typically, the settlor, or trustees, or protector, will possess rights to 
decide upon the beneficiaries and/or their beneficial shares. This may be undertaken through 
a ‘letter of wishes’, or by resolutions or other writings issued by the trustees or protector. The 
trust deed may also provide conditions and parameters for determining beneficiaries and their 
beneficial shares. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 74
Other Trusts
A settlor may also adopt a flexible structure that combines elements of the broad 
categories of trusts outlined above, such as a revocable specific trust, a revocable 
discretionary trust, an irrevocable specific trust and an irrevocable discretionary trust.
7.3. Advantages of Private Trusts
Trusts have gained popularity over recent years for various reasons, including planning 
succession and safeguarding against disputes and challenges over a will, ring-fencing assets, 
tax planning and hedging against inheritance tax (if introduced). These and other benefits are 
highlighted below: 
7.3.1. Planning succession
A trust is an effective vehicle in planning succession, as assets are transferred to the 
trust during the lifetime of a settlor and will not form a part of his estate on his death (assuming 
an irrevocable trust). The apparent benefit is avoidance of disputes and litigation over the 
estate or will of the settlor after his death, and the estate being tied up for substantial time. 
While a person may not wish to settle all his assets upon trust, if there is a perception that 
ownership of certain assets may be the subject to disputes post death, he has the option to 
settle them upon trust during his lifetime, so as to ensure that, after his death, his wishes are 
implemented and not subject to challenge and dispute.
7.3.2. Ring fencing assets 
If a settlor divests ownership and control over an asset by creating an irrevocable trust, 
he, subject to certain laws, may effectively ring-fence them from tax and creditors’ claims. 
Once the asset is transferred into the irrevocable trust, it is no longer the property of the settlor. 
It is relevant to note that if a trust is created by a settlor with the primary or sole motive of 
defeating the rights and claims of the government, or of creditors, it may be subject to 
challenge, and transfer of assets to such trust could be voided, and the assets attached, 
depending upon the facts of the case, and applicable law (including bankruptcy law).
7.3.3. Tax planning
Private trusts may be created with the objective of generating wealth and income for 
certain beneficiaries and as a tool of tax planning. Further, a person may wish to divest 
ownership of assets, in view of concerns over the possible introduction of inheritance tax. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 75
7.3.4. Protecting persons with special needs
A private trust may be a tool to manage and provide for family members having special 
needs, or who are unable manage their affairs, including infants, minor children or persons 
with disabilities. 
7.3.5. Flexibility 
The trust structure provides flexibility in creation of a suitable trust tailor-made to the 
wishes and desires of the settlor. For example, in a non-discretionary trust, beneficiaries will 
have a specific beneficial share and interest, which cannot be altered. On the other hand, if 
the settlor wishes to account for changes in circumstances, or adversity, a discretionary trust 
may be a suitable choice, as it allows for flexibility in the determining beneficiaries and/or their 
beneficial shares and interest. 
7.3.6. Transparency in management 
On a trust being created, its control and management vests in its trustees, and they 
are mandated to operate within the powers and authorities granted to them under the trust 
deed, as section 11 binds them to fulfil the purposes of trust and ensure that the instructions 
of the settlor are followed. 
Section 17 further provides that trustees are bound to act impartially, and execute the 
trust for the advantage of all beneficiaries. Beneficiaries are also granted recourse under the 
ITA if they believe a trustee is not fulfilling his obligations and duties.
7.3.7. Strategic objectives 
Although, in an irrevocable trust, a settlor cedes title and control over trust property, 
he may retain effective control and management over it and the trust, through the trust deed, 
and through a ‘protector’ (which may be the settlor himself). A settlor can allocate and 
apportion trust assets in a manner that suits his strategic objectives and to provide control the 
extent and manner beneficiaries will derive benefits. 
7.3.8 Trust as a pass-through entity
Trusts are commonly used as vehicles to pool investments such as holdings of 
securities and mutual funds. A tax pass through mechanism is a fairly common advantage, 
where income generated by the trust, passes to the beneficiaries tax-free, and is taxed in their 
hands. 
Sections 115 UA and 115 UB of the IT Act, provide that the distribution of income by a 
business trust or investment fund to its unit holders/investors is to be made without any 
deduction of tax. This would, however, not apply to a revocable trust.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 76
Trusts have also been used as alternate investment funds (AIFs), real estate 
investment trusts (REITs) and infrastructure investment funds (“InvIT’s) in view of such pass 
through mechanism. Under regulation (2)(1)(b) of the SEBI (Alternative Investment Funds) 
Regulations, 2012, an AIF can be established as a trust in addition to a company, LLP or body 
corporate. Prior to the introduction the Finance Act, 2015, all AIFs were not considered to be 
eligible for “pass through status”, whereas trusts were accorded such status. Even after the 
eligibility criteria was extended to AIFs formed by companies and LLPs, the trust structure is 
preferred as the other entities are governed by more stringent legislation such as the 
Companies Act, 2013 or the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008. 
While choosing a suitable structure to set up an AIF through a trust structure, factors 
such as determinacy and revocability are essential. An irrevocable determinate Trust is 
appropriate as there is no discretion vested in the trustee to terminate the trust. Beneficiaries 
are also ascertained and identified, easing the reporting of pass through income.
7.4. Exception – HUF property
The exception carved out by section 1 of “mutual relations of members of an undivided 
family” is generally understood to apply to HUF property. If a trust is sought to be created by 
a settlor for holding any HUF property, the settlor does not possess legal right and interest 
over the same and therefore the subject matter of the Trust will be unlawful. 
7.5. Succession planning for small businesses
Establishing an effective plan for succession that is sustainable is essential for owners 
or proprietors of small businesses and assumes even greater significance for small family 
businesses. 
If a family business is held by a corporation, a non-testamentary trust may be a suitable 
vehicle to hold the shares of such company. A trust as shareholder would efficiently collect 
and distribute dividend income between family members who are its beneficiaries, maintain 
oversight and control over the company’s management, and also, if required, retain control 
over key decisions over investment, expansion and divestment. Its trustees would act in the 
common interest of all beneficiaries. This would avoid the inherent issues that sometimes arise 
with a disparate group of shareholders who may hold varying views and opinions on such 
matters, and which may create a potential for disputes and a resultant loss to the operations 
and value of the family business.
7.6. Business Succession 
The aim of every business is to maintain growth, profitability and longevity. In a report 
published in 2018, Credit Suisse observed that India was home to the third largest number of 
family owned businesses in the world with an estimated total of 111 companies with a total 
market capitalization of USD 839 billion. The shareholding pattern of a majority of listed Indian 
firms comprised promoters holding a controlling stake in family held businesses and family 
members or distant relatives from extended families occupying prime managerial positions. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 77
In this scenario, there is a need for family-owned and managed business to provide for 
a smooth and seamless planned transition and succession to persons appointed and chosen 
by the owner. While strong internal relationships based on trust and understanding are 
essential for a hand over to a succeeding generation, a comprehensive business succession 
plan will facilitate a smooth inter-generational transfer, reduce intra-family conflicts and 
disputes, enable continuity and preserve and maintain wealth created by prior generations. 
A robust business succession plan can be coupled with a trust structure, include 
appointment of successors, or trustees responsible for the functioning of the business (who 
may also be family members), establish guidelines for business operations and distribution of 
income or dividends and allow for retention of management control. 
Such a plan can also: (i) create clear divisions between members’ personal and 
professional responsibilities, (ii) determine professional roles and duties, (iii) demarcate 
ownership interests/shares, (iv) provide transparent functioning and reporting, including with 
respect to business decisions, (iv) establish an efficient dispute resolution mechanism, and (v) 
provide for independent expert advice, including through a trust structure.
Disputes over intellectual property rights (IPRs) of family business are not unusual, 
especially when there is division of businesses between family members, with each claiming 
rights over the IPR. A business succession plan can provide for this, with a family trust holding 
the IPR having family members as its beneficiaries. Such trust would provide for 
apportionment between beneficiaries of royalty generated, non-compete agreements and 
concurrent use of the IPR, including for same/different classes of goods/services.
7.7. Offshore Trusts
With an increase of high net-worth individuals (HNI’s) holding assets in India and 
overseas, the cross boundary ramifications of a trust structure, from a tax and regulatory 
aspect, require consideration. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI), through the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999 (FEMA) and Exchange Control Regulations, controls cross border 
transfer of funds and regulates the parties to a trust on the basis of residential status.
An offshore trust, in the Indian context, is a trust formed outside India by an Indian 
resident, and, in addition to the laws of the resident jurisdiction, will be subject to such Indian 
exchange control laws and regulations as well as Indian taxation law. Other legislations such 
as the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 and Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign 
Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015 should also be considered in relation to 
a foreign trust.
FEMA allows an Indian resident to hold, own, transfer or invest in foreign currency, 
security and also immovable property outside India if such assets were owned, held or 
acquired by him while he was a resident outside India or if he has inherited property from a 
person who was resident outside India. If an Indian resident wishes to transfer funds and 
property to an offshore trust, he may do so through the Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS), 
under which upto USD 250,000 per person per financial year may be remitted overseas 
without RBI permission. 
Based on the complexity of options available in a trust structure, factors such as 
residency status of beneficiaries and location of assets play an important role in deciding the 
best suited entity, which is also tax efficient in both India and abroad. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 78
7.8. Family Arrangements
A family arrangement or settlement is a vehicle adopted by families to agree to and 
effect distribution and transfer of businesses and/or assets (movable and/or immovable) 
between their members. The arrangement or settlement is effectively a ‘contract’ in law. It may 
provide for immediate transfers of any or all business, assets or properties, and/or contemplate 
transfers in future, including a specified date, or during a specific time period, or on the 
occurrence of an event such as the death of particular family member or a combination of 
them.
There is no ‘one size fits all’ in a family arrangement or settlement, each family having 
its own objectives. However, while these may vary, the prime motive is usually to settle existing 
disputes, or avoid potential and future disputes arising, between family members, especially 
when a family has grown and succeeding generations have come into existence, and/or are 
actively involved. 
A family arrangement or settlement, based on its objectives, may involve all, or select, 
family members, and/or some or all businesses, assets, and properties. Accordingly, the 
instruments that may be employed will vary. Typically, these may include all, or a combination, 
of the following:
(a). a memorandum or an agreement of family arrangement which either sets out 
the acts, deeds, matters and things to be completed, or which itself operates as an 
instrument of transfer of any or all assets. Stamp duty and registration would be 
attracted on such instrument of a transfer of any assets are effected.
(b). instruments of gift under which assets and properties, or a share or interest 
therein, are gifted;
(c). instruments creating a private trust for the benefit of certain family members 
and/or their children and/or future generations, and/or the transfer to such trust assets 
and properties, or a share or interest therein;
(d). instruments of sale and transfer, for transfer of assets and properties, or a 
share or interest therein;
(e). an instrument setting out a business succession plan, including management 
goals, expansion, and rights and obligations of family members; 
(f). one or more wills bequeathing assets and properties, or a share or interest 
therein (though as stated in Chapter 4, a will can be altered and replaced with a new 
will); and,
(g). a memorandum or recording of the family arrangement or settlement, which 
serves, inter alia, as recording of all acts, deeds, matters and things done and 
completed in effecting and completing the same. Such instrument does not require 
compulsory registration under the Registration Act, as long as it does not effect 
transfers of assets or properties, or is an agreement or contract to do so. 
If disputes arise between parties to a family arrangement or settlement, or a party fails 
or refuses to adhere or comply, the arrangement or settlement being a ‘contract’, it would have 
to be settled, or enforced, through a dispute resolution process. If there is an instrument that 
records the arrangement or settlement, and it expressly provides that disputes will be 
addressed and settled by mediation and/or arbitration, then the same would govern, failing 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 79
which disputes would have to be resolved by adopting proceedings before a court of 
competent jurisdiction.
In designing, formulating and implementing a family arrangement and settlement, 
various factors have to be taken into consideration, in addition to the motives, objectives, 
wishes and desires of family members. These include taxation, stamp duty, registration, and 
applicability of laws, rules, and regulations, or contractual conditions or covenants, that impact, 
and/or impose conditions or restrictions on transfer of businesses, assets and properties. 
7.9. Chapter Review Questions
1. How is a gift of immovable property made?
2. What are the elements applied in relation to stamp duty payable upon an instrument 
of gift?
3. What is a trust?
4. Who can be a trustee?
5. How are testamentary trust and a non-testamentary trusts created?
6. What is the primary difference between a revocable trust and an irrevocable trust?
7. How does a business succession plan assist a family owned business?
8. How do trusts help in managing family owned business IPR? 
9. What is an offshore trust and what assets can it hold? How can it be funded?
10. Enumerate the instruments that may be employed in a family arrangement. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 80
Answers to Chapter Review Questions 
Chapter 1
1. The different types of succession by which the property of a deceased will devolve is 
testamentary succession, that is a valid will which provides the terms for devolution of 
property, or by intestate succession, where there is no will, or an invalid will. In case of 
intestate succession property will devolve according to the personal laws of intestate 
succession governing the deceased. 
2. There are three different types of domicile: (i) domicile of origin, (ii) domicile of choice, 
and (iii) domicile by operation of law. 
3. Section 6 of the ISA provides that for the purpose of succession, an individual may 
have only one domicile.
4. The ISA provides that the original domicile of a legitimate child will be the country of 
domicile of the father, at the time of the child’s birth, and the domicile of an illegitimate 
child, will be the country of domicile of the mother, at the time of the child’s birth.
5. The principle difference between lineal and collateral consanguinity is: (i) lineal 
consanguinity exists between two people who have either ascended or descended in 
a direct line from the other, and (ii) collateral consanguinity exists between two people 
who have neither ascended or descended in a direct line from the other, but have 
descended from a common ancestor.
6. A person will have died intestate if (i) he or she has died without a will (also known as 
total intestacy), (ii) where there is a will not dealing with the entire estate, in which case 
a person will be deemed to have died intestate in respect of the part of his or her estate 
that is not dealt with in the will (this is known as partial intestacy), and (ii) where there 
is a will that is invalid in whole or part, also known as partial intestacy.
7. Yes, a will can be partially void to the extent of invalid bequests. The invalid bequests 
will not operate and will have no legal effect. 
8. Immovable property is governed by the principle of lex situs under section 5(1) thereof, 
which provides that devolution of immovable property in India will be governed by the 
laws of India regardless of domicile at the time of death, and moveable property will 
be governed by the principle of lex domicilli under section 5(2), which provides that 
devolution of moveable property will be governed by the laws of the country in which 
the deceased was domiciled at death.
9. A succession certificate is granted by a court, to heirs, to establish authenticity and 
their entitlement to an inheritance. It is granted by a District Court pursuant to a petition 
and may be granted to a person of sound mind, not being a minor and having interest 
in the property of the deceased.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 81
10. While granting letters of administration, preference is given to the widow/widower, then 
to persons beneficially entitled to the estate, failing which, to (a) creditor(s). It will be 
granted to person who has the best title to the estate.
Chapter 2
1. Intestate succession for Hindus, Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists is governed by the HSA, 
while testamentary succession for them is governed by the ISA. Testamentary and 
intestate succession for Muslims is governed by uncodified Mohammedan law. 
Testamentary and intestate succession for Parsis, Indian Christians and persons 
married under the Special Marriages Act, 1954 is governed by the ISA.
2. The HSA applies to Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs and Jains by religion, and other person 
who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion. 
3. No, the HSA only governs intestate succession while testamentary succession for such 
groups is governed by the ISA. 
4. A HUF comprises a common ancestor and lineal male descendants, their wives and 
daughters. 
5. When distributing the property of a deceased, full blood relatives are preferred over 
half blood relatives. In the absence of both relatives, property goes to uterine blood 
relatives.
6. If two persons die at the same time making it impossible to know who survived whom, 
it is assumed that the younger of the two deceased survived the elder.
7. According to section 8, the property must be first distributed amongst the heirs falling 
under class I, failing which class II heirs, failing which amongst agnates, and, lastly, 
cognates of the deceased.
8. The Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 introduced several changes including, 
grant of equal coparcenary rights to females, abolition of survivorship, allotment of 
shares in coparcenary property to females equal to males, right of a female to claim 
partition. 
9. The Quran, the Sunna, Ijma and Qiyas are considered the primary sources of Muslim 
law in India. There are mainly two different schools of Muslim law divided on the basis 
of the sects formed after the death of Prophet Mohammed, (i) the Sunni school of law, 
and (ii) the Shia school of law. These schools are further subdivided into schools based 
on sects.
10. A will must be in respect of property capable of being transferred and which exists at 
the time of the testator’s death. Only one-third the estate may be bequeathed by will, 
subject to certain conditions and exceptions as prescribed by Shia law and Sunni law. 
Under Shia law, a testator can only dispose of the one-third to an heir or a complete 
stranger (non-heir), without the consent of heirs. Any bequest in excess of one-third, 
whether to an heir or a complete stranger, cannot take effect and is invalid, unless all 
other heirs consent. Such consent may be given before or after the testator’s death. 
Under Sunni law, a testator may dispose up to one-third of his estate only to a stranger, 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 82
without having to obtain consent of other heirs. However, bequest of up to one-third of 
property to an heir will require consent of the other heirs after the testator's death.
11. Under Sunni law, when property is bequeathed to a child in the womb and the child is 
not born within six months of the testator’s death, the bequest will lapse. Under Shia 
law, if property is bequeathed to a child in the womb, the bequest is valid if the child is 
born within 10 lunar months.
12. Under Sunni law, a bequest in favour of a person who caused the death of the testator, 
whether intentionally or accidentally, will not take effect; whereas under Shia law, the 
bequest will not take effect only when the death of the testator has been caused 
intentionally. 
Chapter 3
1. Anyone who is of sound mind and has attained the legal age of majority can dispose 
of their property by a will. 
2. Part I deals with intestate succession as applicable to Christians, Parsis and Jews and 
Part VI deals with testamentary succession as applicable to wills made by the same 
groups as well as Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs and Jainas, subject to territorial exceptions. 
3. A lapsed legacy fails to take effect as a result of the death of a legatee before the death 
of the testator or before the legacy is payable. 
4. Inheritance is the passing of the title to an estate upon death, and a bequest is the act 
of bequeathing or leaving a thing under a will.
5. The rule against perpetuity is contained in section 114, which provides that any 
bequest will be invalid where vesting of interest in property bequeathed is delayed 
beyond the lifetime of any persons living at the date of the testator's death and the 
minority of some person who shall be in existence at the expiration of that period and 
to whom, if he attains full age, will own/inherit the bequeathed property. It applies to 
movable and immovable property. Section 14 of TOPA also provides for it, and limits 
the maximum time period beyond which property cannot be transferred.
6. A bequest of a specified part of a property is a specific legacy, and the bequest of a 
certain sum arising from any property is a demonstrative legacy. If specified property 
is given, the legacy is specific, and if the legacy to be paid out of specified property, it 
is demonstrative. Example - If A bequeaths all his residential properties to B it is a 
specific legacy, If A bequeaths a monthly maintenance to B, payable out of rent arising 
out of commercial properties, it is a demonstrative legacy. 
Chapter 4
1. A will is an instrument of testamentary succession, which specifies the manner in which 
the property of the testator (maker of the will) will devolve after his or her death, that 
is, the distribution of the property of the deceased and in what proportion and manner. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 83
2. The law broadly recognizes and classifies wills as follows: 
(i) Privileged Will and Unprivileged Will: Under section 65 a privileged will may be made 
in extraordinary circumstances like war or a dangerous expedition. Such will may be 
made orally or in writing. An unprivileged will is one made by a person who does not 
fall within the exception carved out for privileged wills.
(ii) Contingent Will: It becomes effective on the occurrence or fulfilment of a specified 
condition or contingency mentioned therein, non-fulfilment of which renders the will 
inoperative. 
(iii) Concurrent Will: Two wills written by the same person, each will providing 
instructions on how certain assets of the testator are to be distributed. 
(iv) Mutual Will: A will executed by two persons (both testators) who mutually agree on 
certain terms and conditions and confer reciprocal benefits on each other, making each 
other legatees. The terms and conditions of such a will are binding on the surviving 
testator after the death of the other. 
(v) Joint Will: A will made by two or more persons for determining how their joint estate 
will devolve upon their beneficiaries. It must stipulate conditions in the case of death 
of one of the testators. If the will is to take effect after the death of two or more persons, 
then it is not enforceable during the lifetime of the other(s). The surviving testator(s) 
is/are bound to the terms and provisions of the will, as they can only be altered or 
amended with consent by both or all testators.
(vi) Holograph Will: A will that is entirely handwritten. 
(vii) Duplicate Will: Two or more copies of a will executed by a testator. Usually one 
copy is kept with the testator and the other with another person.
3. The key ingredients of a valid will are: (i) the testator must be a major, (ii) the will must 
be a legal declaration of the testator’s intention; (iii) that declaration must be with 
respect to the testator’s property; (iv) the desire expressed that the declaration should 
be effectuated after his death, (v) signed by the testator in the presence of two or more 
witnesses, who are subsequently required to attest, (vi) the testator should be of sound 
mind and disposing capacity, and not be subject to fraud, coercion, compulsion or 
duress at the time of making the will.
4. It is not mandatory to register a will under section 18 of the Registration Act. Wills are 
included in the category documents of which registration is optional. Due to this 
exclusion from mandatory registration, the genuineness of a will in India cannot be 
challenged on the grounds of its non-registration.
5. A codicil is a written document that is executed by a person to modify, add to, amend, 
clarify, or revoke provisions of a previously executed will. A codicil effectuates a 
change in an existing will without requiring a new will.
6. In order to modify, alter or amend a will, the testator may do any of the following: (i) 
overwrite the original will which will require signatures of the attesting witnesses, (ii) 
prepare a supplemental document known as a codicil, or (ii) execute a new will. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 84
Chapter 5
1. An executor of a will is defined by section 2(c), as a person to whom the execution of 
the last will of a deceased person is by, the testator’s appointment, confided. An 
executor derives his authority from the will and is appointed by the testator to fulfil the 
last wishes of the testator as prescribed by his or her will and ensure that his estate is 
distributed in accordance with the will.
2. Section 2(a) defines an administrator as a person appointed by the competent authority 
to administer the estate of the deceased person when there is no executor.
3. There is no difference between an executor and an administrator in terms of their 
duties. The difference is with respect to their appointment, that is, an executor is 
nominated by the will of a deceased, failing which, or in case there is no will, 
an administrator may be appointed by a court to manage or administer the deceased’s 
estate.
4. Powers of an executor: 
The powers of an executor are contained in Chapter VI. An executor may sue to 
recover debts in respect of all cause of action that survive the deceased, prosecute or 
defend any action or special proceeding subject to certain exceptions, dispose of 
property, distribute the estate in accordance with the will, and exercise general powers 
of administration including expenditure on acts necessary for the administration of the 
estate.
Duties of an executor: 
The executor’s duties are contained in Chapter VII. After taking inventory and 
assessing the value of the estate, an executor is to ensure compliance order set out in 
which the estate is to be apportioned with regard to debts and expenses. Firstly, 
expenses incurred on funeral ceremonies, death-bed charges including medical 
attendance and stay for one month preceding death, are to be paid. Secondly, 
expenses of obtaining probate and costs that may be incurred in respect of judicial 
proceedings necessary to administer estate, are to be paid. Thirdly, wages due to any 
labourer, artisan or domestic servant, for services rendered within three months of 
death, are to be paid. And lastly, other debts according to their respective priorities 
need to be discharged. Further, debts are to be paid before payment of legacies. When 
all these steps have been completed, the executor can move a petition for permission 
to distribute what is left of the assets to the beneficiaries under the will. 
5. 'Probate' means a copy of a will certified under the seal of a court of competent 
jurisdiction with a grant of administration of the estate of the testator. A probate can be 
granted only to the executor appointed under the will. A probate is granted to an 
executor or executors (in succession, in case more than one is named), by the 
appropriate High Court, with a copy of the will attached. One can apply for 
a probate any time after seven days of the death of the testator. 
6. Section 57 provides that a will is required to be probated from the competent court, 
subject to the exceptions contained therein. The property should be transferred on the 
basis of such probate to avoid any future litigation. A conjoint reading of sections 
213(1) and 57(1) establishes that a probate is mandatory in respect of a will made by 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 85
a Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, or Jain, residing within the limits of West Bengal, Bihar, 
Orissa, Assam, Madras, or Mumbai, or if any property is situate therein. 
Chapter 6
1. When two or more persons jointly own property they may hold it as 'tenants-incommon' or as ‘joint-tenants’. The share and interest of a tenant-in-common may be 
bequeathed, or in the absence of a will, such share and interest will pass, by 
succession, to the heirs of the deceased co-owner. However, in a joint tenancy, the 
co-owners/joint tenants hold a single unified interest in the property which cannot be 
bequeathed by will, or pass by succession (if there is no will). The interest of a 
deceased co-owner will only pass by survivorship to the surviving co-owner. 
2. The term ‘transmission’ is the process whereby units in mutual funds, held by a 
deceased, are transferred either to the surviving unitholder, or to a nominee, or to the 
legal heirs. Mutual fund units can be held as either solely or jointly (upto a maximum 
of three holders) and the mode of operation could be either or survivor; any or survivor 
or on joint basis. 
3. On the death of the sole holder, and in the absence of a nomination, the legal heir(s) 
of the deceased would have to approach the Depository Participant (DP) with the 
requisite documents for transmission of the shares. This would include a duly stamped 
affidavit executed by all the legal heirs, or by the identified legal heir if there is a 
probate, or succession certificate, or letters of administration, obtained. However, if the 
value of the shares per listed company does not exceed INR 200,000, a simple noobjection certificate is required from all legal heirs in favour of the claimant to such 
shares, or alternatively a family settlement executed and notarized by all legal heirs of 
the deceased, each of which must be submitted together with an indemnity bond. If 
there is a nomination made, the nominee would have to submit a transmission request 
form and attach a death certificate attested by a notary.
4. A nominee, may claim the proceeds of an insurance policy on the death of the 
policyholder. Section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938 provides that the policyholder who 
holds a policy of life insurance of his/her own life, may nominate the person or persons 
to whom the money secured by the policy shall be paid in the event of his/her death. 
Where a nomination is cancelled or altered by an endorsement, or a bequest is made 
under a will, a notice of a change in the nomination should be submitted to the insurer, 
as it is not liable for payments to the nominee registered in its records.
Chapter 7
1. Section 122 of TOPA defines a gift as a voluntary transfer of property from one person 
to another without compensation or any kind of consideration. A gift of immovable 
property having a value of INR 100 or more, has to be made by a registered instrument 
of gift executed by the donor and the donee and attested by two witnesses. The donee 
must accept the gift. No love and affection is necessary to make a gift, and all that is 
required is that it is voluntary and for no consideration or compensation.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 86
2. The elements include the age of the property, the location of the property, the age and 
gender of the owner, the user of the property, the type of property and the amenities 
attached to the property.
3. A trust is created when there is an agreement between persons, under which property 
of one is held by another or others, for the benefit of a third party(ies), known as 
beneficiary(ies). The parties to a trust include, the author or settlor, trustee(s), and 
beneficiary(ies). A trust may also have a protector. 
4. Any person who is competent to contract, that is, of sound mind, having attained the 
age of majority and not being disqualified under law, may be a trustee.
5. A testamentary trust is created under a will, and comes into existence on the death of 
the maker of the will (testator). A non-testamentary trust is created during the lifetime 
of the settlor under an instrument (usually a trust deed).
6. In a revocable trust, the settlor retains control over the trust property, and may reassume ownership over the same. In an irrevocable trust the settlor cedes control and 
ownership over the trust property. 
7. A business succession plan, which may include the creation of a trust, will attempt to 
achieve sustainability, continuity and a seamless transfer of control and management. 
Coupled with such plan, a private family trust can be created to: (i) hold ownership of 
the business, (ii) provide for the beneficial interest/share of each family member, (iii) 
regulate and oversee management of the business, (iv) provide for distributions to 
family members of income arising out of the business, (v) provide a demarcation 
between beneficiaries personal and professional responsibilities, and (vi) generally 
improve governance.
8. Disputes over IPR of a family business are not unusual after the death of a founder or 
owner, and/or when there is a split in family businesses. Trust ownership of IPR is 
efficient, and can enable apportionment of royalties between its beneficiaries and 
manage and control the use and enjoyment of the IPR, including non-compete 
agreements and concurrent use of IPR, whether for the same, or for different classes 
of, goods and services.
9. An offshore trust is a trust formed outside India by an Indian resident and is governed 
by Indian foreign laws and tax laws, in addition to the laws of the resident jurisdiction. 
Indian law permits an Indian resident to hold, own, transfer or invest in foreign 
currency, security and also immovable property outside India if such assets were 
owned, held or acquired by him while he was resident outside India or if he has 
inherited property from a person resident outside India. An Indian resident can, without 
RBI approval, also fund an offshore trust through the Liberalised Remittance Scheme 
(LRS), which permits investment abroad upto USD 250,000 per person per financial 
year. 
10. Each family arrangement or settlement will have its own objectives and requirements 
and therefore the instruments employed will depend upon these factors. Typically, any 
one or more of the following instruments may be employed: (a). a memorandum or an 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 87
agreement of family arrangement; (b). instruments of gift; (c). instruments creating a 
private trust; (d). instruments of sale and transfer; (e). an instrument setting out a 
business succession plan, management goals, expansion, etc.; (f). wills; and, (g). a 
memorandum or recording of the family arrangement or settlement. 
Disclaimer 
This module is intended to provide a general overview and understanding of certain 
provisions of law, and other legal principles, as referred herein, as they stood on the date this 
module was written. All laws and legal principles are subject to amendment and change at 
any time, and therefore the provisions of law and legal principles referred herein are also 
subject to change. This module is not intended to, and does not, provide legal instruction or 
advise, or induce, or encourage the reader to impart any legal instruction or advise to any 
persons. Any persons who reads this module, including financial planners, financial advisors, 
estate planners, professionals, and students, unless otherwise separately qualified to practice 
law in their jurisdiction and of good standing, must not impart or attempt to impart any legal 
advice or consultancy, to any persons, and should request such persons to consult a qualified 
lawyer of good standing. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 88
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 2
India-Specific Estate Planning
FPSB Licensed Materials
Copyright © 2018-2020 Financial Planning Standards Board. All rights reserved.
This publication may not be duplicated in any way without the express written consent of the 
publisher. The information contained herein is for the personal use of the reader and may 
not be incorporated in any commercial programs, other books, databases, or any kind of 
software or any kind of electronic media including, but not limited to, any type of digital 
storage mechanism without written consent of the publisher or authors. Making copies of this 
material or any portion for any purpose other than your own is a violation of United States 
copyright laws.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 3
Table of Contents
Table of Contents 3
Preface 10
Chapter 1: Introduction to Hindu Law, Muslim Law and The Indian Succession Act, 
1925 11
Learning Objectives 11
Topics 11
1.1. Laws of Inheritance 11
1.2. Hindu Law 12
1.3. Mohammedan Law/Muslim Law 12
1.1.4.1. Indian Succession Act, 1925 - Applicability to Different Religions 13
1.4.2. Lex Situs & Lex Domicilli 13
1.4.3. Domicile of Origin 13
1.4.4. Acquisition of new domicile 14
1.4.5. Domicile of Choice and Domicile by Operation of Law 14
1.4.6. Consanguinity or Kindred 15
1.4.6.1. Lineal consanguinity 15
1.4.6.2. Collateral consanguinity 15
1.4.7. Mode of computing degree of kindred 16
Illustrations 16
1.5. Intestate Succession & Testamentary Succession 16
1.6. Wills – General Overview 17
1.7. Succession Certificates & Letters of Administration 18
Succession Certificates 18
Letters of Administration 19
1.8 Mutation and process of distribution of Estate 19
1.9. Chapter Review Questions 20
Chapter 2: Laws of Succession Based on Religion 21
Learning Objectives 21
Topics 21
2.1. The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 21
2.1.1. Principle of Propinquity (Proximity of relationship) 22
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 4
2.1.3. General rules of Succession (on priority) 22
(a). Full-blood relations are preferred over half-blood relations: 22
(b). Right of a child in womb: 23
(c). Presumption in case of simultaneous death: 23
(d). Mode of succession of two or more heirs: 23
2.1.3.1. Order of distribution of shares amongst Class I and Class II heirs 23
2.1.3.2. Distribution of shares between heirs in Class I and Class II 24
2.1.3.3. Order of succession among ‘agnates’ and ‘cognates’ 24
2.1.3.4. Blood relationships (Full Blood, Half Blood, Uterine Blood) 25
2.2. Hindu Undivided Family, Ancestral and Self-Acquired Property 25
2.2.1. Hindu Undivided Family 25
2.2.2. Constituents of a HUF 26
Coparceners 26
Karta 26
2.2.3. Types of Property under Uncodified Hindu Law 26
Ancestral Property 26
Joint Family Property 26
Self-acquired Property 26
Nature of Ancestral Property & Self-acquired Property 27
2.3. Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 27
2.4. The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 (Sharia Act) 28
2.4.1. Primary Sources of Muslim Law in India 28
2.4.2. Bequest of property by will (Wasiyatnama) 29
2.4.3. Requirement of consent in case of bequest of one-third of property 29
2.4.4. Bequest of property where a testator has no heirs 29
2.4.5. Manner of abatement of legacy in case bequest exceeds one-third without 
consent of heirs 30
2.4.6. Bequest to a child in womb is valid 30
2.4.7. Bequest of property to an heir causing the testator's death 30
2.5. Chapter Review Questions 30
Chapter 3: Salient Features of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 in Testamentary and 
Intestate Succession 31
Learning Objectives 32
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 5
Topics 32
3.1. Introduction 32
3.2. Definitions 33
Will 33
Testator 33
Legatee 33
Codicil 33
Executor 33
Administrator 33
Probate 33
Letters of Administration 34
Minor 34
3.3. Applicability of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 34
Succession for Hindus 34
Succession for Muslims 34
Succession for Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists 34
Succession for Christians, Parsis and Jews 34
3.4.1. Persons capable of making a Will 34
General Principles 35
Illustrations 35
3.4.2. Animus testandi 36
3.4.3. Lapse of Legacy 36
Illustrations 36
3.4.4. Bequest made to a class of persons 36
Illustrations 37
3.4.5. Rule against perpetuity 37
Illustrations 37
3.4.6. Onerous, Independent & Contingent Bequests 37
Onerous Bequests 37
Illustration 38
Independent Bequests 38
Illustration 38
Contingent Bequests 38
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 6
Illustrations 38
3.4.7. Specific & Demonstrative Legacy 38
Specific Legacy 38
Illustrations 39
Demonstrative Legacy 39
Illustrations 39
Order of payment when legacy directed to be paid out of fund the subject of 
Specific Legacy 39
Illustration 39
3.5.1. General Rules of Intestacy 40
3.5.2. Rules specific to Parsis dying Intestate 40
3.6. Chapter Review Questions 41
Chapter 4: Types of Wills & Requirements of a Valid Will 41
Learning Objectives 42
Topics 42
4.1. Introduction 42
4.2. Classification of Wills 43
Privileged Will 43
Unprivileged Will 43
4.3. Types of Unprivileged Wills 43
4.3.1. Contingent Will 43
4.3.2. Concurrent Will 44
4.3.3. Mutual Wills & Joint Wills 44
Mutual Will 44
Joint Will 44
4.3.4. Holograph Will 45
4.3.5. Duplicate Will 45
4.4. Requirements of a valid Will 45
4.5. Duly and validly executed Will 46
4.6. Attestation 47
4.7. Appointment of an Executor 48
4.8. Amending a Will 49
Codicils 49
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 7
New Will 50
4.9. Chapter Review Questions 50
Chapter 5: Administration of an Estate 51
Learning Objectives 51
Topics 51
5.1. The Executor – Legal representative in a fiduciary capacity 51
5.2. Powers of an Executor or Administrator 52
5.3. Duties, Role and Responsibilities of Executors and Administrators under 
the Indian Succession Act, 1925 53
5.3.1. Aggregate inventory of estate and assessed value 53
5.3.2.1. Probate – Definition 54
5.3.2.2. Importance and Applicability of a Probate 54
5.3.2.3. Obtaining a Probate 54
5.3.3. Establish solvency of the estate, pay expenses, pay off debt on priority
55
5.3.4. Ancillary Duties & Responsibilities of an Executor or Administrator 56
5.4. Chapter Review Questions 56
Chapter 6: Tenancy-in-Common and Joint Tenancy, Transmission & Nomination 57
Learning Objectives 57
Topics 57
6.1. Tenants-in-Common and Joint Tenancy 57
Tenancy in common 58
Joint-tenancy 58
6.2. Contracts- Holding on any/either or survivor basis in bank accounts, 
mutual funds and securities 59
6.2.1. Bank Accounts 59
Either or Survivor 59
Anyone or Survivor 59
Former or Survivor 59
Latter or Survivor 60
Jointly Held Account 60
Jointly or Survivor 60
Minor’s Account 60
Comparative Table of modes of Operation 60
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 8
6.2.2. Mutual Funds 61
6.2.3. Securities 61
6.3. Nomination in Life Insurance Policies 62
6.4. Nomination in Housing Societies 63
6.5. Married Women’s Property Act and Estate Planning 63
6.6 Other Tools for Estate Planning – Power of Attorney 64
6.6.1. Powers of Attorney, its use and purpose 64
6.6.2. Types of Power of Attorney - general and special 64
6.6.3. Revocation of PoA 64
6.6.4. Limitations of PoA holder 65
6.6.5 PoA executed abroad 66
6.7. Chapter Review Questions 66
Chapter 7: Gifts, Trusts & Family Arrangements in Estate Planning 66
Learning Objectives 67
Topics 67
7.1. Gifts 67
Other Matters Related To Gifts 68
7.1.1. Inheritance Tax 68
7.1.2. Tax on Gifts 69
7.1.2.1. Movable Property – Fair Market Value 69
Determination of FMV for inventory as per the Income Tax Rules 70
7.1.2.2. Immovable Property – Stamp Duty 70
Stamp Duty implications on a Gift 71
7.2. The Indian Trusts Act, 1882 71
7.2.1. Definitions 71
Author/Settlor 71
Trustee 71
Protector 72
Beneficiary 72
Trust Property 72
Trust Deed 72
7.2.2. Types of Trusts 772
7.2.2.1. Testamentary & Non-Testamentary Trusts 72
7.2.2.2. Public, Charitable or Religious Trusts & Private Trusts 73
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 9
Public Trust 73
Private Trust 73
7.2.2.3. Revocable & Irrevocable Trusts 73
Revocable Trust 73
Irrevocable Trust 73
7.2.2.4. Non-Discretionary & Discretionary Trusts 73
Non-Discretionary Trusts 73
Discretionary Trust 733
Other Trusts 74
7.3. Advantages of Private Trusts 74
7.3.1. Planning succession 74
7.3.2. Ring fencing assets 74
7.3.3. Tax planning 74
7.3.4. Protecting persons with special needs 74
7.3.5. Flexibility 75
7.3.6. Transparency in management 75
7.3.7. Strategic objectives 75
7.3.8 Trust as a pass-through entity 75
7.4. Exception – HUF property 76
7.5. Succession planning for small businesses 76
7.6. Business Succession 76
7.7. Offshore Trusts 77
7.8. Family Arrangements 78
7.9. Chapter Review Questions 79
Answers to Chapter Review Questions 790
Chapter 1 800
Chapter 2 81
Chapter 3 82
Chapter 4 82
Chapter 5 84
Chapter 6 85
Chapter 7 85
Disclaimer 87
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 10
Preface
Estate or succession planning is relevant in the complex world we live in. There is a 
growing interest in safeguarding assets and structuring succession. To effectively service 
clients’ needs and your objectives, as financial planners, it is necessary to understand and 
approach estate planning in a structured fashion, and assess the diverse factors involved, 
including estate value and composition, family dynamics, tax benefits and governing law. 
Generally, people are reticent about planning succession. However, with a new found 
awareness of the need to pre-empt and avoid disputes, this view is slowly changing. An 
unplanned succession can lead to lengthy disputes and litigation, which is time consuming, 
costly, and, typically, the estate is tied up, sometimes for decades, until settlement is achieved 
or the proceedings finally adjudicated. 
A financial planner should holistically advise clients on the options available while 
being cognizant of legal framework. An overall understanding of the law surrounding
succession planning is therefore necessary.
The law encompassing succession has evolved considerably due to India’s diverse 
multi-cultural population. As India does not have a unified civil code governing all faiths, there 
was a need for codification of religious laws governing succession. The first statute governing 
succession was the Indian Succession Act, 1865 (repealed) (based on English Law) but it 
excluded all native Indians due to the extent of exceptions contained therein, although the 
Hindu Wills Act, 1870 brought all wills and codicils made by Hindus under its ambit. 
Subsequently, the Probate and Administration Act, 1881 was made applicable to both Hindus 
and Muslims. In view of multiple statutes and personal laws governing religious groups, 
including the Indian Succession Act, 1865, Hindu Wills Act, 1870, Probate and Administration 
Act, 1881, Parsi Intestate Succession Act, 1865, Succession Certificate Act, 1889, etc., the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925 (ISA) was ultimately enacted to bring about uniformity and for 
consolidating the law on succession. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 11
Chapter 1: Introduction to Hindu Law, 
Muslim Law and The Indian Succession 
Act, 1925
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
1-1 Understand the legal structure of estate and succession planning in India.
1-2 Understand the key principles under the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
1-3 Understand the law governing succession of individuals based on religion.
Topics
1.1. Laws of Inheritance
1.2. Hindu Law
1.3. Mohammedan Law/Muslim Law
1.4.1 Indian Succession Act, 1925 – Applicability to Different Religions
1.4.2. Lex Situs & Lex Domicilli
1.4.3. Domicile of Origin
1.4.4. Acquisition of new domicile 
1.4.5. Domicile of Choice and Domicile by Operation of Law 
1.4.6. Consanguinity or Kindred
1.4.6.1. Lineal Consanguinity
1.4.6.2. Collateral Consanguinity
1.4.7. Mode of computing of degree of kindred
1.5. Intestate Succession & Testamentary Succession
1.6. Wills – General Overview
1.7. Succession Certificates & Letters of Administration
1.8. Mutation and process of distribution of Estate
1.9. Chapter Review Questions
1.1. Laws of Inheritance 
The extent of inter and intra religious diversity in India poses a significant challenge in 
implementing a uniform civil code as religious communities follow their own personal laws in 
matters relating to marriage, divorce, succession etc. Personal law is generally defined as a 
law that applies to a certain class or group of people or a particular person, based on religion, 
faith, and culture. The laws of succession in India are complex, multi-layered, diverse, and 
dependant on the personal laws of the deceased, which, in turn, is typically based on religion.
The three laws of succession in India are:
(a). Hindu Succession Act, 1956 which governs the Hindus, Jains, Sikhs and 
Buddhists;
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 12
(b). The Mohammedan Law, which is an uncodified law mainly based the principles 
of Shariat governing Muslims; 
(c). The ISA, which applies to Parsis, Indian Christians and persons married under 
the Special Marriages Act, 1954. 
This Chapter will discuss the above laws.
1.2. Hindu Law 
The Hindu Succession Act, 1965 (HSA), came into force on 17th June, 1956, and 
amended and codified the law relating to intestate succession amongst Hindus. It contains the 
entire law of inheritance applicable to Hindus, Sikhs, Jains and Buddhists. It also provides for 
devolution of property with respect to two main schools of Hindu law, that is, Mitakshara and 
Dayabhaga, as well as classes of heirs, devolution of property on the respective classes, 
disqualification of heirs, and failures. 
With the introduction of the 2005 Amendment Act (as defined hereinbelow in Chapter 
2) the law was radically changed by abolishing the concept of a limited estate of Hindu women, 
and by giving them the absolute right to deal and dispose of their self-acquired property. 
HSA is dealt with in greater detail in Chapter 2.
1.3. Mohammedan Law/Muslim Law
Mohammedan personal law is uncodified and based on the principles of Shariat, being
the commandments of Allah. It is multi-layered, highly nuanced, complex, and applies 
differently to different factions of Muslims. As it has been developing since time immemorial, 
there are numerous sources of law that have modified its development.
Broadly, there are two schools of Mohammedan law, based upon the sects formed 
after the death of the Prophet Mohammed, being:
(a). the Sunni school, which relies on the Sunnah, a record of the teachings of the 
Prophet, which is further subdivided into four schools i.e. Hanafi, Maliki, Shafii, and 
Hanbali. This school follows the personal law known as ‘Sunni law’; and,
(b). the Shia school, which relies on ayatollahs or religious leaders' interpretations 
of the Prophet's teachings, distinct from the Sunni school owing to interpretive 
differences. This school follows the personal law known as ‘Shia law’.
The Shariat lays down a code of obligations, and hence Mohammedan personal law 
encompasses spiritual, religious, legal and social teachings and guidance, as well as the law 
applicable to marriage, dower, divorce, maintenance, Wakfs, testamentary succession, 
inheritance or non-testamentary succession, etc.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 13
The laws of inheritance principally lay down the property that is heritable, the class of 
heirs, shares of heirs, principles to be followed for the devolution of properties and how the 
law will be applicable for different schools of law. 
Mohammedan law is dealt with in greater detail in Chapter 2.
1.1.4.1. Indian Succession Act, 1925 - Applicability to Different 
Religions 
ISA largely governs the succession laws applicable to Parsis and Indian Christians. It 
also governs the testamentary succession of Hindus and applies to persons married under 
the Special Marriages Act, 1954. 
Part V deals with intestate succession. Chapter II, from sections 31 to 35 sets out rules 
for intestates other than Parsis, that is, largely Indian Christians, and governs, amongst other 
things, devolution of property and rights of a widower. Chapter III prescribes special rules for 
Parsis that die intestate under sections 50 to 56 and sets out, amongst other things, general 
principles relating to intestate succession and division of the deceased’s property among 
different heirs. 
These provisions are dealt with in greater detail in Chapter 3. Certain governing 
principles as envisaged by the ISA are as follows:
1.4.2. Lex Situs & Lex Domicilli
Under the ISA, the devolution of the deceased’s estate is based on two established 
English principles: 
Lex Situs or law of the place where a property is situated, governs the immovable 
properties in a deceased’s estate, under section 5(1), which provides that any immovable 
property of a person who has died intestate (that is, not leaving a will or testamentary 
instrument), will be regulated by the laws of India regardless of domicile at death.
Lex Domicilli or law of domicile, under section 5(2), which provides that moveable 
property of a person who has died intestate will be regulated by the law of the country in which 
the deceased was domiciled at death. 
1.4.3. Domicile of Origin
Domicile and residence are an important first step in succession and estate planning. 
Residence of a person is relevant to determine income tax liabilities, and domicile is relevant 
in the context of non-tax considerations such as succession. The concept of residence is 
based on a minimum number of days that the (tax) assesse must be in a country to qualify as 
its resident. Domicile, however is a concept that captures both physical presence and intention 
to stay within territorial limits. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 14
Domicile is defined as the country that a person treats as their permanent home, or 
lives in and has a substantial connection with1
. It is important to understand domicile, in order 
to effectively plan a person’s estate, owing particularly to cross border ramifications. As stated 
above, moveable property is based on domicile at the time of death. Therefore, moveable 
property of persons domiciled in India at death will be subject to Indian law. 
The ISA lays down general principles of domicile. Section 6 provides that a person 
may have only one domicile for succession. The ISA also enlists three types of domicile, being, 
domicile of origin, domicile by choice and domicile by operation of law.
Sections 7 to 9 deal with Domicile of Origin and provides that such domicile of every 
legitimate child is the country where the father was domiciled at the time of birth of the child. 
In the case of an illegitimate child, the domicile of origin is the country where the mother was 
domiciled at the time of birth. Under section 9, the domicile of origin will prevail until a new 
domicile is acquired.
1.4.4. Acquisition of new domicile
Under section 10 a person will be deemed to acquire a new domicile by taking up fixed 
habitation in a country that is not the domicile of origin. The term ‘fixed habitation’ is not 
defined; however, it is generally understood as an intention to acquire a new domicile, which 
is acquired by ‘taking up fixed habitation’ in a country other than the domicile of origin. 
In Central Bank vs. Ram Narain2
, the Supreme Court held that the domicile of origin 
remains constant even if the individual leaves the country with the intention of never returning 
till the person acquires domicile elsewhere. This was further elaborated in Dr. Yogesh 
Bharadwaj vs. State of Uttar Pradesh3
in which the Supreme Court observed that domicile of 
origin cannot be “shaken off easily”. Therefore, unless a certain intention to permanently reside 
elsewhere is proved, the domicile of origin continues.
1.4.5. Domicile of Choice and Domicile by Operation of Law
Generally, it is presumed that a domicile of origin will continue, until it is established 
that a person has given it up by residing elsewhere with the intention of never returning. 
Therefore, there must be a combination of both residence and intention to reside permanently 
or for an unlimited period. In Kedar Pandey vs. Narain Bikram Shah4
, the Supreme Court held 
that the burden of proof to establish that a person has acquired a domicile of choice is on the 
person asserting it. It is important to understand that business connections or ownership of 
assets elsewhere will not exclusively evidence domicile of choice.
While domicile of choice is dealt by section 10, section 11 sets out a special mode of 
acquiring domicile, that is, if a person has been a resident of India for at least year and wants 
1 Oxford Dictionary
2 AIR 1955 SC 36
3 AIR 1991 SC 356
4 AIR 1966 SC 10
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 15
to be domiciled in India, a declaration in writing stating the desire and intent of acquiring such 
domicile must be submitted to the relevant government office.
Sections 14 to 18 deal with domicile by operation of law, and with the object of 
determining the domicile of dependants, such as minors and married women, that is, persons 
whose domicile is dependent on and changes with the domicile of another person in law. 
These provisions cover three categories of dependants; minors, married women and lunatics 
or persons with unsound mind.
Summing up, for ascertaining domicile, the rules above should be considered, along 
with the determination of whether the domicile of origin has been overridden by domicile of 
choice. 
1.4.6. Consanguinity or Kindred
Part IV of the ISA, dealing with consanguinity, does not apply to intestate or 
testamentary succession to the property of a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, Jaina or 
Parsi, who are each governed by personal law.
Consanguinity or kindred relationship, per section 24, means “the connection or 
relation of persons descended from the same or common ancestor”.
Consanguinity is of two types: (i) lineal and (ii) collateral.
1.4.6.1. Lineal consanguinity 
Lineal consanguinity, defined in section 25, is the relationship between two persons 
who are directly ascendant or descendent from the other, such as parent-child, grandparentgrandchild and so forth. When computing lineal consanguinity, every generation, whether 
ascending or descending, constitutes one degree. For example, a parent-child are related to 
each other in the first degree, there being one generation separating them. Grandparentgrandchild are accordingly related in the second degree.
1.4.6.2. Collateral consanguinity
Collateral consanguinity, defined in section 26, is a relationship between persons 
having a common ancestor, but not directly ascending or descending from each other. 
Examples are, siblings ascending from the same parents and cousins who ascend from a 
common grandfather.
While Schedule I contains a table for computing degrees of kindred, that determines 
the manner in which/upon whom property will devolve, section 27 contains the following 
important rules for determining succession:
(a). there is no distinction between those related to the deceased through their 
father or mother i.e. relatives on paternal and maternal sides (of the same degree). 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 16
(b). no distinction is made between half blood and full blood relatives (of the same 
degree).
(c). an unborn child subsequently born alive, if conceived at the time of the death 
of the deceased, is treated as alive / there is no distinction between a child who was 
conceived (but subsequently born alive) at the time of death of the deceased and a 
child who was born during the lifetime of the deceased.
1.4.7. Mode of computing degree of kindred
Part IV and Schedule I computes the degree of kindred or consanguinity separately for 
lineal and collateral consanguinity.
Lineal consanguinity: Under section 25(2), for the purpose of ascertaining in what degree of 
kindred a lineal relative stands to the deceased, every generation, whether ascending or 
descending, constitutes a degree. This has been dealt with above.
Collateral consanguinity: Under section 26(2), for ascertaining in what degree of kindred any 
collateral relative stands to the deceased, it is necessary to reckon upwards from the 
deceased to the common stock and downwards to the collateral relative, a degree being 
allowed for each person, both ascending and descending.
While Schedule I contains a table of consanguinity and computations for determining 
the degrees of kindred, for computation of degrees of collateral relatives, one must begin from 
the person whose relatives are to be reckoned, moving upwards to the common ancestor, or 
downwards to the collateral relative. Thus, the computation is a sum of the degree in which 
the common ancestor stands from such relative in addition to the degree in which the common 
ancestor stands from the deceased.
For example, for ascertaining the degree of kindred of a brother, the degree will be 
computed by reckoning upwards from the deceased to the common ancestor, that is, the 
father, related in the first degree to the deceased, and then to the brother who is related to the 
father in the first degree. Therefore, the brother will stand related to the deceased in the 
second degree.
Illustrations
A and B are brothers having the same father X. A is related to X in the first degree, 
and X is also related to B in the first degree. Therefore, there are two degrees between A and 
B, and A is related to B in the second degree.
C and D are cousins having the same paternal grandfather Z. C is related to Z in the 
second degree, and Z is also related to his grandson D in the second degree. Therefore, there 
are four degrees between C and D, and C is related to D in the fourth degree.
1.5. Intestate Succession & Testamentary Succession
The Oxford dictionary defines an ‘intestate’ as ‘A person who has died without having 
made a will’. Therefore, intestate succession typically connotes the law of inheritance or 
succession applicable upon the death of a person who has not left a will. Other than in the 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 17
case of a Hindu, Mohammedan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain, a deceased intestate’s assets will be 
distributed in accordance with the ISA. For Hindu and Muslim intestates, vesting takes place 
in terms of their personal laws. This will be discussed later.
While the dictionary definition has a wider import, section 30 provides specifically that, 
‘A person is deemed to die intestate in respect of all property of which he has not made a 
testamentary disposition which he is capable of taking effect.’ Hence, a person would be 
deemed to have died intestate when there is no will, or when there are assets that are not 
dealt with in the will of the deceased. The former is known as total intestacy and the latter as 
partial intestacy. 
Accordingly, where assets are excluded from a will, the laws of intestate succession 
will apply to them and they will devolve accordingly. It is, however, important to understand 
that if the will contains a general, or residuary (catch all) bequest of all other assets, it would 
not be a case of partial intestacy, as, effectively, all assets are dealt with.
Intestate succession often leads to disputes, as the distribution of the deceased’s 
estate is governed entirely by the relevant law of inheritance, without any flexibility, unless a 
mutual agreement is arrived between the sharers of the estate.
Moving to testamentary succession, a will is the most common and basic instrument 
articulating and apportioning the devolution of an estate on death. A ‘Will’, under section 2(h), 
is a legal declaration of the intention of a testator with respect to his property which he desires 
to be carried into effect after his death. When making one, the following key factors are 
necessary to keep in mind:
(a). a will should be clear, describe, in detail, the estate, contain unambiguous 
bequests, and also provide for alternate bequests in case primary bequests fail or are 
invalid; 
(b). it should contain a residuary provision to cover any part of the estate that is not 
dealt with specifically;
(c). although not mandatory to name an executor, it is advisable that one is 
appointed. 
(d). an ‘In-Terrorem’ provision is sometimes prudent to incorporate. It provides that 
if a beneficiary challenges the will and/or any of the bequests made therein, such 
person will lose all benefits under the will. While this does not restrict a beneficiary 
from legally challenging a will, it can be an efficient deterrent. 
1.6. Wills – General Overview
A will is always susceptible to challenge and therefore it is necessary that the following 
conditions are met:
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 18
(a). the author of a will should be of sound mind and attained the age of majority. 
(Section 59);
(b). the will should be in writing and executed before two witnesses who should 
each attest the will, all in each other’s presence. (Section 63).
Wills do not require compulsory registration or safe-custody, under the Indian 
Registration Act, 1908 (Registration Act). Even if registered, or deposited in safe-custody, 
there will be no presumption of correctness or validity, that is, a will may be challenged5
.
A will may be declared void if it is:
(a). made by a person who is of unsound mind or a minor (Section 59)
(b). obtained by fraud, coercion, or importunity (Section 61)
(c). a privileged will and the survives beyond a month from making it. (Section 
66(h))
(d). not expressive of any definite intention or is void for uncertainty. (Section 89)
A void bequest does not usually invalidate the will. Therefore, in certain cases a will 
remains valid, while a bequest therein is void. A few examples of void bequests are given 
below:
(a). a gift to an attesting witness of the will (Section 67) 
(b). a bequest not expressive of any definite intention, being void for uncertainty. 
(Section 89)
(c). a bequest to a person not in existence at the time of the testator’s death. 
(Section 112)
(d). a bequest of a life interest (not absolute interest) to an unborn person (Section 
113).
(e). a bequest infringing the rule against perpetuity. (Section 114)
(f). a bequest made with respect to a prior void bequest. (Section 116)
(g). a bequest made upon an impossible condition (Section 126)
(h). a bequest based upon immoral or illegal conditions (Section 127)
1.7. Succession Certificates & Letters of Administration
Succession Certificates 
A succession certificate is a certificate issued by a court of jurisdiction, usually a District 
Court, to legal heirs, and confers authority to inherit debts, securities and other movable 
assets. 
Under section 373, a succession certificate will be granted if the court decides that the 
petitioner has the right, and best title, to the assets in question. A succession certificate will 
5 Section 18 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 19
specify the debts and securities contained in the petition, and may authorize the holder to 
either receive interest/dividends or to negotiate/transfer securities, or both.
Succession Certificates are essential to prove the entitlement of an heir claiming 
inheritance, and, in some states required to transfer title of immovable property along with a 
probate. In some states, however, only a probated will is necessary. 
A succession certificate may be granted, on a petition filed, to a person of sound mind, 
not being a minor and having interest in the property. 
Letters of Administration
Letters of Administration are granted to a person (known as an Administrator) by a 
competent court, or probate registry, in respect of the entire estate of a deceased in the 
following circumstances:
(a). there is no will or testamentary instrument, or
(b). there is a will but an executor has not been appointed, or
(c). the executor named in a will refuses to act, or
(d). the executor named in a will dies.
In determining who should be appointed as administrator, preference is given firstly to 
the widow or widower, followed by persons beneficially entitled to the estate, and failing which 
to petitioning creditor(s). Under section 293, letters of administration cannot be granted before 
fourteen days from the date of the death of the intestate.
On appointment, the administrator is required to collect the estate, pay lawful debts of 
the estate and deal with and distribute the estate in accordance with the law of succession 
that governs the deceased. 
1.8. Mutation and process of distribution of Estate
Any change of title ownership of an immovable property (plot of land, flat, house, bungalow
etc.) from one person to another when the subject property is sold or transferred is referred to 
as Mutation. By mutating a property, the new owner gets the property recorded in his name in 
the concerned government authority’s revenue records.
Mutation is considered a vital document in case of ownership related to land. For example, if 
an agricultural land is acquired by the government and the registry of the land is in the name 
of ‘A’ while mutation is in favor of ‘B’, the government will release the acquisition funds in 
favour of ‘B’, as in the revenue records ‘B’ is recorded as the owner of the land.
Mandatory documents required for mutation are:
• Sale Deed copy
• Application for mutation with court fee stamp affixed on it
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 20
• Indemnity bond on stamp paper of requisite value
• Affidavit on stamp paper of requisite value
• Receipt of up-to-date property tax payment
In case of inheritance or Will the documents required are:
• Death Certificate
• Copy of Will or Succession Certificate
• Indemnity bond on stamp paper of requisite value
• Affidavit on stamp paper of requisite value attested by a Notary
• Receipt of up-to-date property tax payment in case of Power of Attorney
• Copy of Power of Attorney
• Copy of Will
• Receipt for payment registered with a sub-registrar
• Application for mutation with court fee stamp affixed on it
It is worthwhile to periodically check for details regarding mutation as it helps to find if any
illegal transaction has been carried out on the property.
1.9. Chapter Review Questions
1. What are the different types of succession?
2. What are the types of domiciles? 
3. Can a person have more than one domicile?
4. What are the original domiciles of a legitimate child and illegitimate child?
5. What is the principal difference between lineal and collateral consanguinity?
6. When is a person said to have died intestate?
7. Can a part of will be void?
8. How is movable and immovable property of an intestate dealt with?
9. What is a succession certificate? 
10. What is the preferred order considered while appointing an administrator under Letters 
of Administration?
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 21
Chapter 2: Laws of Succession Based on 
Religion
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
2-1 Understand the applicability of succession laws based on religion of a person.
2-2 Understand basic principles of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and Mohammedan Law.
Topics
2.1. The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 
2.1.1. Principle of Propinquity (proximity of relationship)
2.1.2. General rules of Succession (on priority)
2.1.3.1. Order of distribution of shares among Class I and Class II heirs
2.1.3.2. Distribution of shares between heirs in Class I and Class II 
2.1.3.3. Order of succession among ‘agnates’ and ‘cognates’
2.1.3.4. Blood relationships (Full Blood, Half Blood, Uterine Blood)
2.2. Hindu Undivided Family, Ancestral and Self-Acquired property
2.2.1. Hindu Undivided Family
2.2.2. Constituents of a HUF
2.2.3. Types of Property under Uncodified Hindu Law
2.3. Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005
2.4. The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 
2.4.1. Primary Sources of Muslim law in India 
2.4.2. Bequest of property by will (Wasiyatnama)
2.4.3. Requirement of consent in case of bequest of one-third of property
2.4.4. Bequest of property where testator has no heirs
2.4.5. Manner of abatement of legacy in case bequest exceeds one-third without consent of 
heirs.
2.4.6. Bequest to a child in womb is valid
2.4.7. Bequest of property to an heir causing the testator’s death
2.5. Chapter Review Questions
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 22
2.1. The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 
HSA applies to, and governs the intestate succession of:
(a). a person who is Hindu by religion, in any of its developments or forms, a 
follower of Prarthana, Brahmo or Arya Samaj;
(b). a person who is Sikh or Buddhist by religion; and
(c). to any person who is not a Christian, Muslim, Jew, or Parsi by religion. 
It is not retrospective, and does not affect the succession relating to a Hindu who died 
before 17th June, 1956. It also excludes property owned by Hindus who married under the 
Special Marriages Act, 1954. In the above cases, matters of succession would be governed 
by the ISA.
2.1.1. Principle of Propinquity (Proximity of relationship)
Succession under the HSA is based on the Mitakshara school, a legal treatise on 
inheritance. The principle of propinquity, meaning in order of nearness of blood relation, that 
is, nearest degree of blood relation forms the basis of succession. 
The allocation of the parental property was originally allocated on the rule of 
possession by birth which meant that the sons of the family had exclusive right by birth in the 
property of the joint family, while daughters held no such rights. This rule of allocation was 
known as the doctrine of survivorship. 
When a Hindu dies intestate, this principle of propinquity is used to determine 
distribution amongst heirs, where preference of heirs is based upon the proximity of their 
relationship to the deceased. The principle of propinquity signifies the right by which an heir 
may take possession of the estate. 
2.1.3. General rules of Succession (on priority)
General rules governing the rights of heirs in respect of an estate are based on the 
basis of proximity of their relationship with the deceased. Enumerated below are a few general 
rues:
(a). Full-blood relations are preferred over half-blood relations: 
The relationships of heirs are divided in different categories, depending upon the 
closeness of relationship between the two. Section 2(e) defines “full blood”, “half blood” and 
“uterine blood” as follows: 
“(2)(e) "full blood", "half blood" and "uterine blood"—
(i) two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood when they are 
descended from a common ancestor by the same wife, and by half blood when they 
are descended from a common ancestor but by different wives; 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 23
(ii) two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood when they are 
descended from a common ancestress but by different husbands; 
Explanation - In this clause "ancestor" includes the father and "ancestress" the mother.
This is to be read with section 18, which provides that heirs related by full blood are preferred 
to heirs related by half-blood when determining devolution of property.
(b). Right of a child in womb: 
Under section 20, a child in a mother’s womb at the time of the death of the father has 
the right to inherit property as if the child was born before his death. The child’s share will thus 
be reserved till birth. 
(c). Presumption in case of simultaneous death: 
Section 21 lays down an artificial rule of presumption based on age in cases where 
two persons have died making it impossible to know who survived or who died first. In such a 
case, the presumption in law is that the younger survives the elder. 
(d). Mode of succession of two or more heirs:
Section 19 sets out a rule to govern succession in case property devolves upon two or 
more heirs. In such a case, heirs will take the property per capita and not per stirpes, that is, 
each heir will be entitled to their own equal share. 
It is important to note that in a distribution per stirpes (which means “by representation”) 
property is divided according to class of heirs or equally amongst each branch of the family. 
Further, heirs will take the property as tenants-in-common and not joint-tenants, that 
is, the property does not revert to one in case the other dies. Section 19 deals with the legal 
concept of tenants-in-common and joint-tenants. Acquiring and holding property as tenantsin-common means that on death, the deceased’s share will devolve upon the heirs of the 
deceased. In case of a joint-tenancy, the deceased’s share will devolve upon the other joint 
tenants, and not to heirs
2.1.3.1. Order of distribution of shares amongst Class I and Class II heirs
Section 8 provides that when a Hindu male dies intestate, his property will be 
distributed amongst his heirs on the basis of the class of heirs they belong to, as specified by 
the Schedule contained in the HSA. Each class excludes the other, that is, if there are heirs 
in one class, the property will devolve entirely upon them, to the exclusion of the other classes. 
Accordingly:
(a). property will first devolve upon Class I heirs. Class I heirs are known as 
‘preferential heirs’. Class I heirs include sons, daughters and the widow;
(b). if there are no Class I heirs, the property will devolve upon Class II heirs. Class 
II heirs include brother(s) of the deceased and sister(s) of the deceased. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 24
(c). if there are no Class II heirs the property will devolve upon agnates. Agnates 
include a deceased’s son’s son, a deceased’s father’s brother’s widow and a 
deceased’s father’s brother’s daughter; and, 
(d). if there are no agnates, property will devolve upon cognates. Cognates include 
a deceased’s daughter’s children and a deceased’s son’s daughter’s children. 
This hierarchy above stems directly from the principle of propinquity. 
Section 9 specifies the order of succession amongst heirs in the schedule and also 
belonging to each class. It specifies that: (i) Class I heirs will inherit their respective shares 
simultaneously and to the exclusion of all others, (ii) Class II heirs will inherit according to their 
position as specified by the entries of the schedule. Class II is also divided into nine subsections or entries, each containing several groups of heirs. For example, the heirs specified 
in Entry I of Class II will be preferred over those in Entry II. 
2.1.3.2. Distribution of shares between heirs in Class I and Class II 
Although Class I heirs inherit their share of the property simultaneously their shares 
are not equal. Section 10 sets out rules for the distribution of such share amongst Class I 
heirs, which are as follows:
Rule 1- The widow of the deceased (or if there are more than one widow, all widows together) 
take one share.
Rule 2- The surviving sons and daughters and the mother of deceased each take one share.
Rule 3- The heirs of each pre-deceased son or each pre-deceased daughter of the deceased 
take one share jointly.
Rule 4 – This elaborates on Rule 3 and provides that in case of a pre-deceased son’s heirs, 
shares will be taken in equal proportion by the widow(s) and sons and daughters. In case of a 
pre-deceased daughter’s heirs, the shares are to be taken in equal proportion by her sons and 
daughters; her husband being excluded.
As far as Class II heirs, section 11 provides that all heirs mentioned in the same entry 
will receive the same proportion of shares. For example, as both, brother and sister of the 
deceased fall under Entry II of Class II, they will inherit the property in the same proportion.
Sections 8,9,10 and 11 and their rules, must be read with section 19, that is, if two or 
more heirs receive the same property together then, they will take it per capita and as tenantsin-common (referred above). 
2.1.3.3. Order of succession among ‘agnates’ and ‘cognates’
As stated above, in the absence of Class I and Class II heirs, agnates will inherit, and 
in their absence, cognates will inherit. Under section 2(a) a person is an “agnate” of another 
person if the two are related by blood or adoption wholly by males. For example, a deceased’s 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 25
son’s son will be an agnate. Under section 2(c) a person is a “cognate” of another person if 
the two are related by blood or adoption but not wholly through males. For example, a 
deceased’s father’s sister’s son will be a cognate. 
Section 12, provides three rules of preference to determine the order of succession 
amongst agnates and cognates, that is:
(a). Rule 1 - Between heirs who claim to be descendants of a male deceased, the 
heir that is related by a nearer line to the deceased is preferred to the one from a 
remote line. For example, agnates classified as the deceased’s son’s son’s son will be 
preferred over the deceased’s brother’s son’s son.
(b). Rule 2 - When an heir in the same line is nearer to the common ancestor than 
another relation in the same line, the former is preferred to the latter. For example, a 
deceased’s father’s brother’s son will be preferred over his father’s brother’s grandson, 
even though both are in the same line, that is, the line starting from father’s father.
(c). Rule 3 - Neither heir is entitled to be preferred to other under Rule 1 and Rule 
2 and they will take shares in equal ratio.
Section 13 sets out rules to compute the manner in which the degree of closeness of 
the relationship of cognates and agnates are to be decided, which is reproduced below:
“(1). The relationship is to be reckoned from the male deceased to the heir in terms 
of degree of ascent or degree descent, or both, as the case may be.
(2). Degrees of ascent and descent shall be computed inclusive of the male 
deceased.
(3). Every generation constitutes a degree either ascending or descending.”
2.1.3.4. Blood relationships (Full Blood, Half Blood, Uterine Blood)
Another relevant rule of succession is that while deciding the proximity of relationships 
for devolution of a deceased’s shares upon heirs, the relationships of the heirs with the 
deceased are divided in different categories, depending upon the closeness of relationship 
between the two (as referred above).
The provisions in respect of blood relationships as dealt with in 2.1.3 (a) above are to 
be read with section 18, under which heirs related by full blood are preferred to heirs related 
by half-blood when determining devolution of property.
2.2. Hindu Undivided Family, Ancestral and Self-Acquired Property 
2.2.1. Hindu Undivided Family 
It is necessary to briefly touch upon the concept of a hindu undivided family (HUF), a 
unique concept under uncodified Hindu Law. A HUF is a body comprising persons lineally 
descended from a common ancestor and includes wives and unmarried daughters. A HUF 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 26
can be formed only by a family and not by an individual. Common examples of an HUF are a 
husband, wife and their children. An HUF comes into existence on its own when a person gets 
married. A married couple themselves can be considered an HUF. 
An HUF is important while determining succession planning of a Hindu as the income 
earned by members is considered to belong to the whole family and not to a specific individual. 
Under section 2(31) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (IT Act) an HUF is considered a ‘person’ 
and is assessed as a separate legal entity. Income of an HUF is taxed in its hands. 
2.2.2. Constituents of a HUF 
Coparceners
A coparcener is a person who acquires interest by birth, up to three generations from 
the senior most male member of the HUF. A coparcener is considered a member of an HUF. 
However, there is a difference between coparceners and members; coparceners have an 
interest in HUF property, but members do not. A coparcener also has the right to demand 
partition of the HUF. The position and rights of a coparcener takes on significant relevance in 
light of the amendments made to the HSA which are dealt with below.
Karta
The Karta is the senior most member of an HUF and tasked with the responsibility of 
managing the HUF and its property. The eldest coparcener takes on the role of the Karta of 
the HUF. The most significant power vested in a Karta is his legal right to deal and alienate 
any HUF property, if he considers that such alienation is for the benefit of the family. A Karta 
may alienate HUF property for legal necessity, for the benefit of the estate and maintenance 
of the family and for performance of certain indispensable duties.
2.2.3. Types of Property under Uncodified Hindu Law 
Under uncodified Hindu Law the primary types of property holding are ancestral 
property, joint family property and self-acquired property. 
Ancestral Property
Ancestral property is acquired through inheritance from ancestors. It is always shared 
by coparceners equally. This type of property is also known as Coparcenary Property. 
Joint Family Property
Joint family property is acquired by the members of a joint family together and also 
consists of ancestral property, wherein every coparcener has a joint interest in the property. 
Self-acquired Property
Self-acquired property is property that was either originally joint family property and 
has now become separate, or property that is self-acquired by an individual and HUF having 
any interest in such property. A member of an HUF may own separate or self-acquired 
property whilst continuing to be a member of the HUF. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 27
It is important to understand these different types of properties as they are dealt with 
differently under the HSA.
Nature of Ancestral Property & Self-acquired Property 
(a). Devolution based on share in property: Ancestral property and joint family property 
devolve upon the successors of a deceased, by survivorship, subject to the provisions of 
section 6 and section 30, only in respect of the deceased’s share in the property. Self-acquired 
property of a person can be dealt with in total and devolves upon his or her successors through 
succession. Although both can be made subject matter of a testamentary disposition, 
ancestral property and joint family property is limited to the share of the deceased, whereas 
self-acquired Property can be dealt with completely.
(b). Nature of Interest: All coparceners acquire interest in ancestral property by virtue of 
their birth into the family. Self-acquired property is the exclusive property of a person, and the 
HUF and its coparceners do not acquire any right to it.
(c). Alienation by Will: Prior to the HSA, no coparcener could alienate his undivided interest 
in ancestral property by way of will. Self-acquired property could be freely dealt with. However, 
Section 30 now enables a Hindu to dispose of his interest in a coparcenary property by way 
of will. Self-acquired property can be dealt with freely by creation of a will.
(d). Alienation by Gift: Self-acquired property can be freely gifted. A right or undivided 
interest in ancestral property cannot be gifted by a coparcener.
2.3. Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 
The Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 (2005 Amendment) brought about a 
revolutionary change to Hindu family law, amending several provisions, the most notable being 
conferment of rights and liabilities upon Hindu women in respect of property and inheritance. 
The principal amendments are:
(a). Granting of coparcenary rights to Hindu females: Females in a Hindu joint family governed 
by Mitakshara law are equally entitled to a share in ancestral property as their male 
counterparts, and granted the same rights and liabilities. 
(b). Abolition of survivorship: Prior to the 2005 Amendment, the interest of the deceased in 
property of a joint Hindu family would, on death, go to surviving co-owners of such property. 
However, post-amendment, such interest will devolve by testamentary or intestate 
succession.
(c). Allotment of shares in coparcenary property to Hindu females: If a Hindu male (in a joint 
Hindu family governed by Mitakshara law) died after the 2005 Amendment, his daughter will 
be allotted the same share as his son. The share of a pre-deceased son or pre-deceased 
daughter will be allotted to their surviving child/children. The 2005 Amendment does not affect 
the rights of a Hindu male to dispose of his self-acquired property under a will. If a male dies 
intestate, then his property will devolve by intestate succession above.
(d). Abolition of pious obligation: The doctrine of pious obligation existed in uncodified Hindu 
law and imposed an obligation on the son, grandson or great grandson of a deceased to pay 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 28
off all (the legal or moral and illegal or immoral) debts incurred by the deceased. Such 
obligation has been abolished.
(e). Right of a female heir to claim partition: Hindu female heirs can claim partition of a dwelling 
house occupied by a joint family; earlier reserved only to Hindu male heirs.
(f). A remarried widow of a pre-deceased son, pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son or 
brother will inherit property of the intestate.
2.4. The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 (Sharia Act)
Mohammedan Law is personal to Muslims, whether by birth or conversion. Section 2 
of the Sharia Act provides that, “notwithstanding any custom or usage to the contrary, in all 
questions (save question relating to agricultural land) regarding intestate succession, special 
property of female (including personal property), marriage, dissolution of marriage, including 
talaq, lis, zihar, lian, khula and mubarar’at, maintenance, dower, guardianship, gifts, trust and 
trust properties and wakfs (other than charities and religious endowments), Muslim personal 
law (shariat) is to apply to all cases where the parties are Muslim.”
2.4.1. Primary Sources of Muslim Law in India 
There are 4 primary sources of Muslim Law in India, that is, the Quran, the Sunnah of 
Hadis, Ijma and Qiya. 
The Quran 
All Muslim communities believe that the Quran is Al-furquan, meaning the one showing 
the truth as distinguished from falsehood and right from wrong. Out of its 6000 verses, only 
200 deal with legal principles, and of these only 80 deal with the law of personal status, like 
inheritance, marriage and divorce. 
The courts in India, while administering the law, cannot interpret the Quran in a way 
that is against the interpretation of the ancient commentators of established authority. It is the 
most highly regarded primary source of Mohammedan Law.
The Sunna 
In Arabic, Sunnah means “tradition” or “way”. It is to be interpreted as a kind of practice, 
that is, words, actions and teaching, of the Prophet or a precedent set by the prophet. Sunnah 
is understood to be the way of life as deduced from the Prophet’s behaviour. Examples of 
Sunnah include voluntary charity, voluntary prayer and fasting, good table manners etc. 
Ijma
Ijma is the Arabic term referring to consensus or agreement of Islamic scholars on a 
point of Islamic law. When a number of people who are learned in Islamic Law agree on a 
particular question, their consensus is binding on the Muslim community. This source is based 
on communal thinking and the belief that a community or group is less likely to make an error. 
The rules set out by Ijma have varying degrees of binding authority in different schools. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 29
The Ijma is considered to be the third most important source after the Quran and 
Sunnah by Sunni Muslims. There is often disagreement between different sects on the 
interpretation of such consensus, some believing that is the consensus of only the first three 
generations of Muslims whereas other sects believe that it is to be interpreted as the 
consensus of only Islamic scholars and jurists.
Qiyas
With the expansion of the Islamic community and their increased interactions with 
different societies, Muslims encountered new situations which were beyond the scope of both 
the Quran and the Sunnah. In Islamic law, the deduction of legal prescriptions from the Quran 
or Sunnah by analogic reasoning on matters not explicitly covered therein or unsystematic 
opinion is called Qiyas. It constitutes the fourth source of Muslim Law. 
2.4.2. Bequest of property by will (Wasiyatnama)
Property under Muslim law is anything which is capable of being transferred and which 
exist at the time of the testator’s death. The Fatwa-i-Alamgiri defines a will as the “conferment 
of a right of property in a specific thing, or in a profit or a gratuity to take effect on the death of 
the testator”. Under Muslim Law, only one-third of a person’s net estate may be bequeathed 
by will, subject to certain conditions and exceptions prescribed under Shia and Sunni law. 
2.4.3. Requirement of consent in case of bequest of one-third of property
Under Shia law, a testator can only dispose of one-third of his estate by will, either to 
an heir or a complete stranger (non-heir), without the consent of heirs. Bequests in excess of 
one-third, either to an heir or a complete stranger, will not take effect and will be invalid, 
unless the other heirs consent to it. Such consent may be given before or after the testator’s 
death.
Under Sunni law, a testator may dispose up to one-third of his estate only to a stranger, 
without the consent of the other heirs. However, bequest of up to one-third to an heir will not 
be effective without the consent of other heirs, which consent is required to be given after the 
testator's death. Consent, once given cannot be rescinded. Consent need not be expressly 
given; it may also be implied by conduct. If all heirs do not consent, the shares of those 
consenting will be bound, and the legacy in excess will be payable out of their shares. If 
consent is not given by the heirs to a bequest of up to one-third of the estate, the bequest will 
lapse and will form the part of the remaining estate of the testator. In case the bequest 
exceeds one-third of the entire estate of the testator, the bequest will abate and the shares 
will be distributed to the heirs mentioned in the will.
2.4.4. Bequest of property where a testator has no heirs 
If a Muslim has no heirs, there are no rules governing bequest of his estate and the 
same may be bequeathed entirely to a stranger.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 30
2.4.5. Manner of abatement of legacy in case bequest exceeds one-third without 
consent of heirs
If a bequest exceeds one-third of the whole estate, and heirs do not consent, the ratio 
of heirs receiving property under a will is subsidized to maintain the rule of one-third. This is 
called abatement of legacy.
 
Under Sunni law, the process of abatement is done in a rateable manner or 
proportionally, that is, reducing the ratio of the property bequeathed to the heirs to maintain 
the rule of one-third. The property will be reduced in the same ratio as the property was 
bequeathed to such heir in the testator's will.
Under Shia law, the process of abatement is undertaken in a preferential manner, that 
is, shares given to heirs under a will are not reduced but are distributed in chronological order, 
as stated in the will. The first name listed in the will, will receive the full shares bequeathed by 
the testator, and remaining shares will be passed in favour of the second, and then the third 
and so on, till the property reaches the one-third limit.
2.4.6. Bequest to a child in womb is valid
Under Sunni law, bequest to a child in the womb is valid, if the child is born within six 
months of the testator's death. If the child is not born within six months, the bequest will lapse 
and will form a part of the remaining property of the testator which is not bequeathed under a 
will. 
Under Shia law, a bequest to a child in the womb is valid, if it is born in the longest 
period of gestation, that is, ten lunar months (lunar month is basically time between one new 
moon or one full moon and next full one).
2.4.7. Bequest of property to an heir causing the testator's death
Under Sunni law, bequest to an heir causing the testator's death, whether intentionally 
or by accident, is not effective.
Under Shia law, bequest to an heir causing the testator's death, only intentionally, is 
not effective.
2.5. Chapter Review Questions
1. What laws of succession are applicable to persons professing different religions?
2. Which religious groups are governed by the HSA?
3. Does the HSA apply to testamentary succession?
4. What is a HUF?
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 31
5. How is the property of the intestate deceased distributed among full blood, half blood 
and uterine blood according to the HSA?
6. What is the rule of presumption under HSA?
7. How is the property distributed among the classes of the heirs of the deceased?
8. What changes were introduced to the HSA by the Hindu Succession (Amendment) 
Act, 2005?
9. What are the primary sources of Muslim Law in India?
10. What conditions must be followed by the testator while preparing the will under Muslim 
law in India?
11. What happens when property is bequeathed to a child in the womb under Muslim law?
12. Under Muslim law, what happens to a bequest of the person who caused testator’s 
death?
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 32
Chapter 3: Salient Features of the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925 in Testamentary 
and Intestate Succession
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
3-1 Understand common definitions.
3-2 Identify the applicability and salient features of the ISA.
Topics
3.1. Introduction
3.2. Definitions
3.3. Applicability of the Indian Succession Act, 1925
3.4.1. Persons capable of making a Will
3.4.2. Animus testandi 
3.4.3. Lapse of Legacy 
3.4.4. Bequest made to a class of persons 
3.4.5. Rule against perpetuity 
3.4.6. Onerous, Independent and Contingent Bequests 
3.4.7. Specific & Demonstrative Legacy 
3.5.1. General Rules of Intestacy
3.5.2. Rules specific to Parsis dying intestate
3.6. Chapter Review Questions 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 33
3.1. Introduction
Testamentary succession is succession by a testament or will made during one’s 
lifetime, determining the devolution of movable and immovable property after death. 
Testamentary succession in India is governed by the ISA and/or applicable personal law. This 
chapter deals with the salient aspects of testamentary succession, specifically Part VI of the 
ISA pertaining to wills, including wills of (i) Hindus, Jains, Sikhs, Buddhists, subject to section 
57, (ii) Indian Christians, (iii) Parsi and (iv) Jews. In matters of testamentary succession, the 
ISA will override all Hindu customs, traditions, and usages. This Chapter also deals with 
general rules of Intestate Succession as dealt with under the ISA.
3.2. Definitions
Important definitions: 
Will 
As defined in Chapter 1, a ‘Will’, under section 2(h), is a legal declaration of the 
intention of a testator with respect to his property which he desires to be carried into effect 
after his death. Part VI (Testamentary Succession) contains provisions on wills. While the 
words will and testament are generally synonymous, the ISA only uses the term ‘will’. 
Testator 
A testator (not defined) is understood to mean the maker or creator of a will. Under 
section 59, every person who has attained majority (above 18 years where there is a natural 
guardian, and above 21 years in case of an appointed guardian) and is of sound mind, may 
make a will. A female who makes a will is called a testatrix.
Legatee
A legatee (not defined) is understood to mean a person who inherits under a will.
Codicil
A ‘Codicil’, under section 2(b), means an instrument made in relation to a will, which 
explains, alters or adds to its dispositions, and is deemed to form a part of the will.
Executor
An ‘Executor’, under section 2(c), means a person to whom the execution of the will of 
a deceased person is, by the testator's appointment, confided; or simply put, a person 
appointed by a testator to execute the will. 
Administrator
An ‘Administrator’, under section 2(a), appointed by a competent authority to 
administer the estate of the deceased when there is no executor.
Probate
A ‘Probate’, under section 2(f), means a copy of a will certified by a Court with a grant 
of administration to the estate of the testator. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 34
Letters of Administration
Letters of Administration are granted where there is no will, or a will in which an 
executor has not been appointed.
Minor
‘Minor’, under section 2(e), means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen 
years. A minor cannot make a will, under section 59. 
3.3. Applicability of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 
The applicable/governing laws with respect to both testamentary and intestate 
succession for different religious groups in India are as follows: 
Succession for Hindus
The ISA applies to the testamentary succession of Hindus. Intestate succession is 
governed by the HSA. 
Succession for Muslims
The ISA does not apply to testamentary and intestate succession of Muslims. 
Succession for them is based on their uncodified personal law derived from religious sources 
(outlined in Chapter 2).
Succession for Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists
The ISA governs the testamentary succession of Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists. Intestate 
succession for them is governed by the HSA.
Succession for Christians, Parsis and Jews
Both testamentary succession and intestate succession for Christians, Parsis and Jew 
is governed by the ISA. 
As stated above, testamentary succession of Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists, 
Christians, Parsis and Jews is governed by Chapter VI which deals with the following matters:
3.4.1. Persons capable of making a Will 
Section 59 - capacity to make a will, which provides soundness of mind and age of 
majority as prerequisites. Soundness of mind is understood as the capacity to properly 
understand the meaning and consequences of one’s actions, and specifically capacity to 
understand the disposition of property under a will. 
Relevant explanations to section 59 are outlined below:
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 35
(a). Explanation 2 allows the deaf, dumb and blind to make a will if they are able to 
know what they do by it. 
(b). Explanation 3 allows a person who is ordinarily insane to make a will during 
an interval when he is of sound mind. Subsequent insanity does not make a will 
invalid. 
(c). Explanation 4 – contains a prohibition to making a will when one is in a state 
of mind that one does not know what one is doing. This includes intoxication and 
illness
General Principles
A will that appears to be duly signed and attested is presumed to be made by a person 
of sound mind, unless proved otherwise. The general rule relied by Indian Courts is that a 
person propounding a will (offering it for probate) would be called upon to show, by satisfactory 
evidence, that it was signed by the testator, that the testator, at the relevant time, was in a 
sound and disposing state of mind, that the testator understood the nature and effect of the 
dispositions and put his signature to the document of his own free will. 
The onus on the propounder can be taken to be discharged on proof of essential facts 
just indicated.6
If a will is rational on the face of it, and appears to be duly executed, it is 
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to be valid. 
Ordinarily when evidence adduced in support of a will, is satisfactory and sufficient to 
prove the sound and disposing state of the testator's mind and his signature as required by 
law, courts would opine in favour of the propounder.
Illustrations
X has a basic understanding of his surroundings but does not have a competent 
understanding as to the nature of his property, who should succeed him in his property or the 
effect of a will. X cannot make a valid will.
Q is suffering from a serious health condition but is capable of understanding the mode 
of disposing her property and making a rational choice of who should inherit her property. A 
will made by Q is valid. 
From the above a person should (i) understand and recollect the extent of his property, 
and (ii) understand that he is bequeathing his property to one or more persons. 
6 Mahesh Kumar (Dead) By L.Rs. vs. Vinod Kumar and Ors. 2012 (3) ALLMR (SC) 470
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 36
3.4.2. Animus testandi 
Animus means "intention to do something” and testandi “to make a will or testament”. 
Therefore, animus testandi is the intention to make will or testament is and a basic requirement 
of a valid will. For example, a mentally disabled person cannot make a valid will, because 
he/she lacks the intention. A person may produce an instrument in compliance with the legal 
requirements of a valid will, yet it may fail to take effect as valid, because of the absence of 
animus testandi, that is, without any intention that it should affect the disposition of his property 
after his death. When considering the validity of a will, courts look into the fact of whether there 
was animus testandi, that is, whether the testator had the intention to convey his property by 
means of the instrument7
.
3.4.3. Lapse of Legacy
Section 105 provides that if a legatee does not survive the testator, the legacy but will 
lapse and form part of the residue of the testator's property, unless it goes to another person 
under the will. To entitle the representatives of the legatee to receive the legacy, it must be 
proved that he survived the testator. Under section 106, if a legacy is given to two persons 
jointly, and one of them dies before the testator, the other legatee will take the entire legacy. 
Illustrations
The testator bequeaths a property to A. A dies before the testator; the legacy lapses 
and forms part of the residue of the testator’s property. 
A bequest is made to B and his children. B dies before the testator, the legacy to B 
and his children lapses.
A legacy is given to X, and, in case X dies before the testator, to Z. X dies before the 
testator. The legacy goes to Z. 
The testator and the legatee perish in the same car accident. There is no evidence to 
show which died first. The legacy lapses. 
3.4.4. Bequest made to a class of persons
Section 111 deals with survivorship in case of bequest to a described class. It provides, 
“Where a bequest is made simply to a described class of persons, the thing bequeathed shall 
go only to such as be alive at the testator's death. 
Exception.- If property is bequeathed to a class of persons described as standing in a 
particular degree of kindred to a specified individual, but their possession of it is deferred until 
a time later than the death of the testator by reason of a prior bequest or otherwise, the 
property shall at that time go to such of them as are then alive, and to the representatives of 
any of them who have died since the death of the testator.” 
77 Satappa Ors. vs. Shantappa and Ors. MANU/KA/3201/2017
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 37
Illustrations
A bequeaths a garage to “the children of B” without saying when it is to be distributed
among them. B had died previous to the date of the will, leaving three children, X, Y and Z. Z 
died after the date of the will, but before the death of A. X and Y survive A. The legacy will 
belong to X and Y to the exclusion of the representatives of Z. 
 
A bequeaths a house to B for life and after his death equally among the children of C. 
Up to the death of B, C had not had any child. The bequest after the death of B is void. 
3.4.5. Rule against perpetuity
The rule against perpetuity is defined in section 114. It provides that a bequest will not 
be valid if vesting of the thing bequeathed may be delayed beyond the lifetime of one or more 
persons living at the testator’s death and the minority of some person who shall be in existence 
at the expiration of that period and to whom, if he attains full age, the thing bequeathed is to 
belong. 
The rule against perpetuity relates to any property, whatever be its nature, and whether 
it is movable or immovable. This rule against perpetuity is also envisaged under section 14 of 
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (TOPA) and limits the maximum time period beyond which 
property cannot be transferred. The rule against perpetuity does not apply to charitable or 
religious endowments.
Illustrations
A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to B for his life, and after B’s 
death to such of B's sons as shall first attain the age of 25. B dies in the lifetime of the testator, 
leaving one or more sons. In this case the sons of B are persons living at the time of the 
testator’s death, and the time when either of them will attain 25 necessarily falls within his own 
lifetime. The bequest is valid. 
A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to B for his life, with a direction 
that after B’s death it shall be divided amongst such of B’s children as shall attain the age of 
18, but that, if no child of B shall attain that age, the fund shall go to C. Here the time for the 
division of the fund must arrive at the latest at the expiration of 18 years from the death of B, 
a person living at the testator's decease. All the bequests are valid.
3.4.6. Onerous, Independent & Contingent Bequests
Onerous Bequests
Under section 122, when a bequest imposes an obligation, the legatee can take 
nothing unless he accepts it fully. This is known as an onerous bequest. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 38
Illustration
A bequeaths her house to X on the condition that X will pay for the education of her 
surviving children. X refuses to perform this obligation and therefore will not receive the house 
bequeathed to her. 
Independent Bequests
Section 123 provides that where a will contains two separate and independent 
bequests to the same person, the legatee is at liberty to accept one of them and refuse the 
other, although the former may be beneficial and the latter onerous. 
Illustration
J bequeaths the sum of INR 50,000, and also a villa in Goa, to A, with the bequest of 
the villa on the condition to that A will have to reside there. A may accept the bequest of money 
and refuse to accept the bequest of the villa. 
Contingent Bequests
Section 124 deals with a bequest contingent upon a specified uncertain event, where 
no time is mentioned for its occurrence. It provides that, in such a case, the legacy cannot 
take effect, unless such event happens before the period when the fund/property bequeathed 
is payable or distributable. 
Illustrations
A legacy is bequeathed to A, and, in case of his death, to B. If A survives the testator, 
the legacy to B does not take effect. 
 
A legacy is bequeathed to P for life, and, after his death to Q, and, "in case of Q’s death 
without children," to R. The language "in case of Q’s death without children" is to be 
understood as meaning in case Q dies without children during the lifetime of P. 
3.4.7. Specific & Demonstrative Legacy
Specific Legacy
Section 142 describes a specific legacy as a specific part of the testator’s property 
(distinguished from all other parts of his property) bequeathed to a legatee. The three 
essentials of a specific legacy are: (a) the property must form part of the testator’s estate, (b) 
it must be identified and distinguished from the remainder of the estate, and (c) there must be 
an intention to bequeath it to a legatee. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 39
Illustrations
C having several immovable properties at New Delhi and also in several other cities, 
bequeaths to D all the immovable property at New Delhi. 
X owns five horses of different breeds and bequeaths his Arabian racehorse to Y. 
Demonstrative Legacy
Section 150 describes a demonstrative legacy as one where a testator bequeaths to a 
legatee a sum of money or a quantity of a commodity from a particular fund or stock. 
The explanation to section 150 sets out a distinction between a specific legacy and a 
demonstrative legacy, that is: “where specified property is given to the legatee, the legacy is 
specific; where the legacy is directed to be paid out of specified property, it is demonstrative”. 
A demonstrative legacy therefore is specific in terms of what the legatee will receive 
but general in terms of the part of the testator’s estate from which such bequest will be made. 
If the fund out of which it is directed to be paid, fails, the legatee will not be deprived of the 
legacy, but will receive the deficiency from the general assets or estate of the testator. 
Illustrations
A bequeaths to B, INR 5,000 being part of a debt due to him from B. He also bequeaths 
to C INR 10,000 to be paid out of his bank accounts, which are further bequeathed to X. The 
legacy to B is specific; the legacy to C is demonstrative. 
A bequeaths to B monthly maintenance of INR 50,000, payable for 2 years. The 
bequest to B is a demonstrative legacy as it is payable out of A’s estate.
Order of payment when legacy directed to be paid out of fund the subject of Specific 
Legacy
Section 151 provides, “that where a portion of a fund is specifically bequeathed and a 
legacy is directed to be paid out of the same fund, the portion specifically bequeathed shall 
first be paid to the legatee, and the demonstrative legacy shall be paid out of the residue of 
the fund and, so far as the residue shall be deficient, out of the general assets of the testator.” 
Hence, a specific bequest from the fund will first be distributed to the intended legatee 
who is receiving the specific legacy and then the legatee receiving the demonstrative legacy 
will receive his bequest, first from the fund and then from the testator’s general estate. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 40
Illustration
A bequeaths to B INR 1,000 being part of a debt due to him from W. He also bequeaths 
to C INR 1,000 to be paid out of the debt due to him from W. The debt due to A from W is only 
INR 1,500 rupees; of this INR 1,500, INR 1,000 belong to B, and INR 500 is to be paid to C. 
C is also to receive INR 500 from the general assets of the testator.
3.5.1. General Rules of Intestacy 
When dealing with intestacy, the ISA is divided into two parts, (i) Rules in case of 
intestates other than Parsis, covered in Chapter II under sections 31 to 49; and (ii) Special 
rules for Parsis specified under Chapter III vide sections 50 to 56. 
Section 32 states that “The property of an intestate devolves upon the wife or husband, 
or upon those who are of the kindred of the deceased, in the order and according to the rules 
hereinafter contained in this Chapter.” 
The governing rules are as follows:
(a). If the intestate has left a widow and lineal descendants, then one-third goes to 
the widow and balance two-thirds to the lineal descendants8
. 
(b). If the intestate is survived by the widow and kindred, but no lineal descendants, 
then one-half goes to the widow and the balance one-half to the kindred9
. 
(c). If there are no lineal descendants or kindred then, that the property goes 
entirely to the surviving husband or wife10
. 
Further, the ISA lays down the rules of distribution among the widow, lineal 
descendants and the kindred of a deceased. According to section 36, if the intestate has left 
a surviving spouse, then his/her share is to be deducted first and then distributed amongst 
lineal descendants and kindred. The rules of distribution among both lineal descendants and 
kindred are contained in sections 33 to 49 of the ISA and deal with every different situation 
that may arise on the death of an intestate, depending on the descendants that survive or 
predecease the intestate.
3.5.2. Rules specific to Parsis dying Intestate
In respect of testamentary succession, all the sections of the ISA are applicable to 
Parsis. However, in cases of intestate succession, there are specific sections carved out which 
are applicable exclusively to Parsis, that is, section 50 to 56 contained in Chapter III of Part V. 
Normal rules of intestacy such as consanguinity do not apply to Parsis. 
General rules are contained in section 50 and are as follows:
8 Section 33(a) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
9 Section 33 (b) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
10 Section 33(c) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 41
(a). No distinction between a living child and a child in the womb who is subsequently born 
alive;
(b). Lineal descendants of an intestate who have died in the lifetime of the intestate without 
leaving a widow or widower or any lineal descendant shall not be considered for 
intestate succession;
(c). A widow or widower of any relative of an intestate who has remarried during the lifetime 
of an intestate shall not be considered and shall be deemed to not exist at the time of 
the intestate’s death.
Section 51 deals with the division of property between widow/widower, children and 
parents of the deceased. The general rule is that if a widow and heirs are alive at the time of 
the death, property will be divided between the widow and each child in equal shares. Further, 
if there is no widow/widower, the children inherit in equal shares. In a case where the parents 
of the intestate are alive in addition to children and/or widower, the property is divided so that 
each parent receives a share equal to half the share of each child.
Sections 52 to 56 deal with specific situations such as division of share of predeceased 
child of intestate leaving lineal descendants, division where intestate leaves no lineal 
descendants but leaves widow/widower of any lineal descendant, where no relative is entitled 
to succeed, and so forth.
3.6. Chapter Review Questions
1. Who can make a will?
2. Who does the ISA govern?
3. What is a lapsed legacy? 
4. What is the difference between bequest and inheritance?
5. What is the ‘rule against perpetuity’?
6. Explain the difference between a specific and demonstrative legacy with an 
illustration. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 42
Chapter 4: Types of Wills & 
Requirements of a Valid Will
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
4-1 Distinguish between the different types of Wills 
4-2 Understand the basic requirements of a valid Will
Topics
4.1. Introduction
4.2. Classification of Wills 
4.3. Types of Unprivileged Wills 
4.3.1. Contingent Will
4.3.2. Concurrent Will 
4.3.3. Mutual Wills & Joint Wills
4.3.4. Holograph Will
4.3.5. Duplicate Will 
4.4. Requirements of a valid Will
4.5. Duly and validly executed Will 
4.6. Attestation
4.7. Appointment of an Executor 
4.8. Amending a Will
4.9. Chapter Review Questions
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 43
4.1. Introduction
Estate planning is an integral part of financial management. Therefore, it is necessary 
to understand the different types of wills recognised in India to effectively assist clients. This 
Chapter also focuses on the importance and requisites of a valid will, the role of an attesting 
witness, alterations made to, or a revocation of, a will, and the necessary requirements of a 
valid will. 
4.2. Classification of Wills 
Wills are broadly classified into privileged wills (Section 65) and unprivileged wills 
(Section 63). The distinction between the two lies in the procedure of execution.
Privileged Will
A special will made in extraordinary circumstances like war or a dangerous expedition. 
Such will can be made oral or in writing. Section 65 provides that any will made by a soldier 
or an airman or a mariner, who has attained the age of eighteen, when he is in actual service 
and is engaged in actual warfare, would be privileged. Such person can dispose of his property 
by a will as prescribed by the mode, manner and rules as described in section 66. 
Unprivileged Will
Every other person who does not fall into the exception carved out for privileged wills, 
can only make an unprivileged will. Unprivileged wills include joint wills, mutual wills and 
contingent wills. These are dealt with below.
A privileged will must be in writing, contain a signature or mark of the testator in 
presence of two attesting witnesses who must also sign or affix their marks in the presence of 
the testator. 
4.3. Types of Unprivileged Wills
4.3.1. Contingent Will
A contingent will is the grant and bestowment of estate, in whole or part, to a 
beneficiary/legatee, subject to fulfilment of condition or event that must be mentioned in the 
will. It attains validity and operates only if the conditions or contingencies prescribed in the will 
have been satisfied or occurred, failing which the will is void. 
The Kerala High Court, in Sridevi Amma & Ors v Venikitaparasurama Ayyan & Ors11, set out 
the following rules for determining the validity of a contingent will:
(1). Such will depends upon the happening of a specified condition or contingency and 
if it fails, the will is inoperative and void thereafter.
11 AIR 1960 Ker 1
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 44
(2). To be regarded as contingent depends upon the intention of the testator, appearing 
either expressly or by necessary implication from the language of the will as a 
whole.
(3). A will is not made conditional merely by statements which have no reasonable or 
logical relation to the testator’s property.
(4). A statement of circumstances which merely indicate necessity, or reason, or 
inducement to make the will, will not make it contingent. 
(5). Where it is doubtful whether a will is contingent, the circumstances under which 
the will was executed or its language should be considered.”
4.3.2. Concurrent Will
Concurrent wills are two wills written by one person, each providing instructions on 
how certain assets of the testator are to be dealt with. For example, one will may deal with 
immovable property exclusively and the other with movable property. They co-exist with one 
another and together, and are held to be valid in law. 
A testator may consider such option to bring about clarity in respect of the distribution 
of his estate, by dividing certain property or beneficiaries into categories, which are defined by 
separate wills. Concurrent wills sometimes cause problems if the wills are not divided 
specifically and contain contradictory statements that deal with the same property in both wills.
4.3.3. Mutual Wills & Joint Wills
Mutual Will
A mutual will is executed by two persons (both testators) who mutually agree, on 
certain terms and conditions, and confer reciprocal benefits upon each other, making each 
other legatees. The terms and conditions of such will are binding on the surviving testator after 
the death of the other. Common examples include a will between a husband and wife 
distributing their respective estates to each other in case of death.
Joint Will
A joint will is one where two or more persons agree to make a conjoint will to determine 
how their joint estate will devolve upon their beneficiaries. An essential feature of this will is 
that it must stipulate conditions in the case of death of one of the testators. If such a will intends 
to take effect after the death of two or more persons, then it cannot be enforceable during the 
lifetime of the other(s). The surviving testator(s) is/are bound to the terms and provisions of 
the will as they can only be altered or amended with consent by both or all testators. In such 
case, a constructive trust is to be formed which holds assets of the deceased testator, till the 
death of the surviving testator(s). A will may be revocable during the lifetime of the testators, 
but once one dies it becomes irrevocable and binding on the other(s). In Minakshi Ammal vs. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 45
Viswanatha Aiyar12, the Court held that a joint will can validly be made by two persons and 
that it may be made to take effect after the death of both testators. The Court also held that if 
the joint will is not a disposition by each testator of his own property but a disposition of joint 
property after the death of the survivor, the will cannot be proved till the death of the survivor.
4.3.4. Holograph Will
A holograph will is entirely handwritten and also known as a handwritten will. Unlike 
other wills, it need not be attested by two witnesses to be considered valid. A common 
drawback of such will is that it depends on the legibility of the handwriting. In Sanat Kumar 
Das & Ors v Smt Arati Das13, an application in respect of letters of administration for a Will 
handwritten by the deceased was accepted by the Calcutta High Court. 
4.3.5. Duplicate Will
A duplicate will is one where a testator executes two copies of the will. Usually one 
copy is retained by the testator, and the other deposited with another person, which may be 
the executor, a trustee, or even an institution such as a bank. This may be done for safety or 
safekeeping. Although there is more than one copy in existence at the same time, each copy 
is considered a single will. In order for a duplicate will to be considered valid, a testator must 
execute the duplicate copy as was done for the original, in accordance with section 63. 
Further, if the testator destroys the original in his custody, all copies regarded as a duplicate(s) 
are to be considered as revoked.
4.4. Requirements of a valid Will
The essential requirements of a valid will, prescribed by law and in judgements, are 
enumerated below:
(a). In Mathai Samuel v Eapen Eapen14, the Court held that a valid will must be a legal 
declaration of the testator’s intention, the testator’s declaration must be with respect to 
his property, and it must contain the desire of the testator that the said declaration 
should be effectuated after his death. 
(b). A will can be made by any person of sound mind not being a minor (above the age of 
18 years as declared in the Indian Majority Act, 1875). This is also provided in section 
59.
(c). A valid will must have the testator’s mark or signature as required by section 63(a), 
without which it cannot be considered a valid will.
12 (1909) 33 Mad. 406
13 (2010) 1 ICC 648 (Cal) (DB)
14 2012 (8) SLT 620
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 46
(d). Section 63(c) deals with attestation by witnesses, and provides that a will has to be 
attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom should have seen the testator 
signing the will. This was ratified in Gopal Swaroop vs. Krishna Murari Mangal and 
Ors.15
.
(e). It must not be made or obtained by fraud, coercion or importunity. Section 61 provides 
that a will made by fraud, coercion or importunity and eliminates the free will of the 
testator, is void. In Asutosh vs. Umasashi16, it was held that the influence to vitiate an 
act must amount to force and coercion destroying free agency, and ordinarily when 
evidence adduced in support of a will is satisfactory and sufficient to prove sound and 
disposing state of the testator and his signature is as required by law, one may be 
justified in making a finding in favour of the will’s validity. However, in cases where 
executor of the will is surrounded with suspicious circumstances and the propounder 
fails to remove the suspicion as to the execution of the will, probate would be refused.
(f). A will can be made at any time during the lifetime of a person and there is no restriction 
as to number of times a will can be made. However, only the last will made before the 
death of the testator is valid.
(g). A will may be amended at any time. If a testator wishes to amend any part of his/her 
will without changing the entire will, the same can be achieved by a codicil.
4.5. Duly and validly executed Will 
The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (Evidence Act) and the Registration Act confer 
registration of any document evidentiary value in a court of law, especially when the existence 
of such document is challenged. Notwithstanding this, it is not mandatory to register a will as 
provided in section 18(e) of the Registration Act, in which wills are included in the category of 
instruments where registration is optional. In Ishwarao Narain Singh vs. Kamla Devi & Ors.17
, 
the Supreme Court held that the genuineness of a will cannot be challenged on the grounds 
of non-registration.
Although registration may not be mandatory, it has some advantages such as: 
(a). protection of the will as it is kept in the safe custody in the office of the Registrar. 
A person not desirous of registering the will may also deposit the same in safe 
custody with the Registrar so that it may be made available to the executors upon 
the death;
(b). Secrecy of the will is maintained because not anyone can examine the will and its 
contents without express permission in writing by the testator himself; or upon his 
death, to any person applying to obtain certified copies on production of his death 
certificate as prescribed under section 57 of the Registration Act. A will deposited 
with the Registrar will generally secure the same from loss or tampering.
(c). A copy of the certified will can only be granted after the death of the testator, to a 
person who applies to obtain the same and submits the death certificate of the 
testator obtained from the concerned authorities. This benefit is only applicable to 
15 2011 (84) ALR 242
16 AIR 1984 Cal 233
17 AIR 1954 SC 280
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 47
persons who apply for certified copies, and not relatives of the deceased whose 
intentions are malafide.
Section 40 of the Registration Act provides that a testator (during his lifetime) and a 
person claiming as an executor or otherwise after the death of a testator, is entitled to present 
a will for registration. Registration may also be undertaken after the death of the testator by 
the executor or any person claiming as executor or otherwise under a will, by presenting it to 
the Registrar for registration. There is no time bar on registration, and it may be presented for 
registration at any time, as prescribed by section 27 of the Registration Act.
Section 43 of the Registration Act contains the procedure to be followed post 
registration. After presenting a will for registration, the Registrar must be satisfied that the 
person presenting it for deposit is the testator, or a duly authorised representative, or agent, 
of the testator. The Registrar will take the will into his custody and place it inside a fire-proof 
box. If the testator wishes to withdraw a deposited will, an application may be made under 
section 44 of the Registration Act, either personally or by duly authorised agent. If the Registrar 
is satisfied that the applicant is actually the testator or his agent, he will deliver it accordingly. 
Section 45 of the Registration Act provides that on the death of a testator who has 
deposited or registered a will, an application may be made to the Registrar who holds the will 
in his deposit to open the same. If the Registrar is satisfied that the testator is dead, he, in the 
applicant's presence, will open the box containing the will, and, at the applicant's expense, 
cause the contents thereof to be copied into his ‘Book No. 3’ for record purposes. When such 
copy has been made, the Registrar will re-deposit the original will. 
4.6. Attestation 
The word “attest” means to bear witness to a fact. Section 63(c) mandates that:
(a). a will must be attested by two or more witnesses,
(b). attestation must be in the presence of the testator,
(c). the witnesses must have to see the testator sign or affix his mark to the will or have 
received personal acknowledgement from the testator that he himself has signed the 
will.
(d). it is not necessary that both witnesses be present at the same time or attest 
simultaneously, but the requirement is that each of the attesting witness must have 
seen the testator sign or affix his mark to the will or has received from the testator a 
personal acknowledgement of his signature or mark upon the will. Each of the attesting 
witness is required to sign the will in the presence of the testator.18
An attesting witness is considered to be one who signs the document in the presence 
of executant/testator after seeing the execution of the document or after receiving personal 
acknowledgment of the testator with regard to the execution of the document19. It is essential 
that the attesting witness puts his signature animo attestandi, that is, for the purpose of 
18 Punni vs. Sumer Chand and Ors. AIR 1995 HP 74
19 Beni Chand (Since Dead) Now by L.R. v Kamla Kunwar and Ors. AIR 1977 SC 63
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 48
attesting that he has seen the testator sign or has received from him a personal 
acknowledgment of his signature (as dealt with in Chapter 3). 
These requirements are to provide an added level of proof when determining the 
validity of a will. Often, attesting witnesses serve the purpose of being able to help authenticate 
the valid execution of a will. A reading of section 63(c) with sections 6820 and 6921 of the 
Evidence Act establishes that a person propounding the validity of a will has to prove that it 
was duly and validly executed, and that should be done by not merely establishing that 
signature on the will was that of the testator but also the attestations were made in the manner 
as contemplated in section 63(c). Section 68 of the Evidence Act does not make it mandatory 
to examine both the attesting witnesses. However, it follows that if one attesting witness 
proves that the testator had acknowledged his signature to him then it is not necessary for the 
other attesting witness to acknowledge. Therefore, mere signatures of witnesses towards the 
end of an instrument or somewhere on an instrument are sufficient to show without explanation 
that the witnesses put their signatures by way of saying that they had seen the document 
being executed and had received an acknowledgement. It is not necessary for them to state 
that they put their signatures in the presence of the testator.22
4.7. Appointment of an Executor 
An executor derives his authority from the will and is appointed by a testator to fulfil his 
last wishes as prescribed by his will and ensure that his estate is dealt with as per his will. A 
testator should ideally appoint a person that he believes will be able to efficiently execute his 
directions, as per the provisions of his will. In order to be considered a capable executor, the 
only requirements are those of majority and being of sound mind. Even a minor can be 
appointed as executor. However probate of the will can be granted only when he/she attains 
the age of majority under section 223.23
A testator is not bound to appoint only a single executor and may appoint more. As 
stated above if a testator does not appoint an executor, a petition for Letters of Administration 
would have to be filed and on grant thereof the will administered in accordance with its terms. 
For the convenient administration of an estate, section 224 permits a person to appoint 
different executors for one will, and provides that probate for separate wills may be granted to 
all executors simultaneously. In such case the estate will remain as one, though its 
administration will vest in separate executors. When a testator appoints several executors, the 
normal inference should be that he expects all of them to act together, the opinion of the 
testator implicit in the appointment being that he expects that his will be fully and properly 
executed when all executors appointed by him act together. 
20 Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872: Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested: If a 
document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has 
been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there is an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process 
of the Court and capable of giving evidence.
21 Section 69 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872: Proof where no attesting witness found: If no such attesting witness 
can be found, or if the document purports to have been executed in the United Kingdom, it must be proved that the 
attestation of one attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the signature of the person executing the 
document is in the handwriting of that person.
22 Dulhin Ful Kueri and Ors. vs. Moti Jharo Kuer AIR 1972 Pat 214
23 Section 223 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925: Persons to whom probate cannot be granted – Probate cannot 
be granted to any person who is a minor or is of unsound mind nor to any association of individuals unless it is a 
company which satisfies the condition prescribed by the rules made by the State Government.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 49
A legatee under a will can be an executor under section 141. If a legacy or bequest is 
given to an executor, in compensation of his service as such executor, the same should be 
mentioned in the will. If an executor is a professional, then a provision for his remuneration 
may be inserted. 
The most important function of an executor is set out in section 222, which provides 
that probate may be granted only to an executor appointed under the will. However, if an 
executor renounces or fails to accept executorship within a reasonable time, Letters of 
Administration would have to be filed. An executor may renounce his executorship either orally 
in the presence of judge or in writing signed by him. After renouncement is made, the executor 
is precluded to apply for probate. An executor is considered a confidante of choice of the 
testator and therefore renunciation is irrevocable and irreversible. 
An executor is required meet all obligations and outstanding debts, if any, of the 
deceased and transfer of assets to the beneficiaries or legatees. The powers of an executor 
are contained in sections 305 to 315, which include disposal of property of the deceased, 
general powers of administration, directly or indirectly purchasing any part of the property of 
the deceased, etc. 
The duties of an executor are enumerated in sections 316 to 331 and include the duty 
to provide funds for the deceased’s funeral ceremonies and expenses, allocating costs 
incurred in judicial proceedings necessary for administrating the estate, paying wages for 
services rendered to the deceased, etc. The powers and duties of an executor have been 
dealt with extensively in Chapter 5.
4.8. Amending a Will
It is always advisable that a testator makes his will irrevocable in the strongest and 
most express terms. However, the testator is not bound by it, and is always entitled to alter 
and/or revoke the same at any time under section 62.
For modifying, altering or amending a will, there are three options available, that is, (i) 
overwrite the original will along with obtaining new signatures of the attesting witnesses, (ii) 
preparing a codicil, or (iii) preparing and executing a new will. While there is no restriction on 
overwriting an original will, it is preferable that a codicil or new will in made and executed to 
avoid confusion, ambiguity or uncertainty. 
Codicils
A codicil is an instrument specifically made in relation to an executed will, that explains, 
alters or adds to its dispositions, and is deemed to form part of the will24
. A codicil may be 
endorsed upon the original will itself, or be a separate document. It is considered an extension 
or addendum of a will and the procedure for execution is similar to the execution of a will. 
Executing a codicil does not bar a testator from further amending his will.
A codicil should ideally refer the specific provisions of the will that are sought to be 
added, removed or altered. In Bhagat Ram v Suresh25 the court held that the same rules of 
execution that apply to a will are applicable to codicils, and that the evidence adduced in proof 
24 Section 2(b) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
25 AIR 2004 SC 436
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 50
of execution of a codicil must satisfy the same requirements so as to apply to prove the 
execution of a will26
. 
As discussed above, registration of a will is optional and the same applies to a codicil. 
However, in practice, if the will is registered, the codicil should be registered. The rationale 
behind registration of both the will and its codicil is to imbibe authenticity of the codicil and 
mitigate against litigation challenging the genuineness of the unregistered codicil.
New Will
In order to carry out structural changes to a will, or when a will requires an overall 
change or the circumstances warrant changing substantial dispositions or bequests, it is 
preferable to execute a new will. This also may apply to a case where several codicils have 
been made, which may lead to an operational nightmare for the executor and/or improper 
distribution of the estate and/or several unhappy beneficiaries/legatees. 
A new (subsequent) will be deemed to revoke the previous will or codicils and is to be 
considered as the last will and testament. There are no restrictions as to the number of times 
the testator may make a will. However, only the last (validly made) will would operate and be 
enforceable. Absence of a recital or confirmation in a new will expressly stating that all earlier 
wills have been revoked has no relevance once the execution of the new will is duly proved. 
In Lachho Bibi vs. Gopi Narain27, the court placed the initial onus of proof on the propounder 
of the will and held that: “The first rule is that the onus probandi lies in every case is upon the 
party propounding a Will, and he must satisfy the conscience of the Court that the instrument 
so propounded is the last Will and testament of a capable testator.”
4.9. Chapter Review Questions
1. What is a will?
2. What are the different types of wills?
3. What are the essentials of a valid will?
4. Is it mandatory to register a will?
5. What is the objective of a codicil?
6. How can a will be altered or amended?
26 Bhagat Ram and Ors. vs. Suresh and Ors. AIR 2004 SC 436
27 Lachho Bibi vs. Gopi Narain and Ors. (1901) ILR 23 All 472
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 51
Chapter 5: Administration of an Estate 
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
5-1 Understand the role and powers vested in an executor. 
5-2 Understand the importance and general procedure for obtaining a probate.
Topics
5.1. The Executor – Legal representative in fiduciary capacity
5.2. Powers of an Executor or Administrator 
5.3. Duties, Role and Responsibilities of Executor and Administrators under the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925
5.3.1. Aggregate inventory of estate and assessed value
5.3.2.1. Probate – Definition
5.3.2.2. Importance and Applicability of a Probate
5.3.2.3. Obtaining a Probate
5.3.3. Establish solvency of the estate, pay expenses, pay off debt on priority
5.3.4. Ancillary Duties & Responsibilities of an Executor or Administrator
5.4. Chapter Review Questions
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 52
5.1. The Executor – Legal representative in a fiduciary capacity
As dealt with earlier, an executor is a person selected by the testator to execute his 
last will and testament. An executor is the legal representative of a testator, acts in a fiduciary 
capacity and holds the assets of the testator after his death, with the authority and duty to 
make decisions per the will. A general example of a fiduciary relationship is one between a 
parent and a minor child, where the parent is responsible for minor’s money or property. It is, 
therefore, the responsibility of an executor to meet all obligations of outstanding debts, if any, 
of the deceased and give consent for transfer of assets to the beneficiaries or legatees under 
the will.
Administrators and executors are an important part of the succession chain especially 
in light of the powers vested in them. Sections 305 to 315 of Chapter VI enumerates the 
powers of executors and administrators, and sections 316 to 331 of Chapter VII set out their 
duties and obligations.
5.2. Powers of an Executor or Administrator 
(a). An Executor has been granted the same powers as the deceased, not only to sue any 
party for all causes of action that survive the deceased but also to recover debts 
owed.28
(b). Section 306 provides that all demands and rights to prosecute or defend any action or 
special proceeding in favour or against a testator at the time of death, survive to and 
against his executors and/or administrators, subject to certain exceptions;
(c). Section 211 confers upon an executor or administrator complete legal right over the 
assets of a testator who are his legal representative for all purposes, and, in whom, on 
death of the testator, all the property vests. Section 307(1) supplements section 211 
and grants an executor or administrator power to dispose of and deal with the property 
of the deceased, vested in him, either wholly or in part, in such manner as he may think 
fit. However, there are certain caveats or exceptions to this power contained in section 
307(2) which lays down the following restrictions in cases where the deceased is 
Hindu, Muslim, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain or an exempted person:
(i). the power of an executor is subject to and is limited by any restriction contained 
in the will. However, if probate has been granted which states in an order in 
writing that despite the restriction, the executor may dispose the property, then 
such restriction will fall away.
(ii). An administrator may not, without the previous permission of the court by 
which letters of administration were granted -
(a) mortgage, charge or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise any 
immoveable property for the time being vested in him under section 211; or 
(b) lease any property for a term exceeding five years. 
28 Section 305 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 53
If an executor or administrator deals with property in a manner that is in contravention 
of the restrictions imposed in section 307, the disposal is voidable at the instance of 
any other person interested in the property.
(d). An executor or administrator is granted general powers of administration under section 
308 and is allowed to incur expenditure from the deceased’s estate on any acts which 
may be necessary for proper care and management of any property belonging to the 
estate. An executor may also make reasonable improvements to the property, with the
sanction of the court.
(e). In order to ensure that an executor or administrator maintains his fiduciary relationship 
with the deceased, section 310 expressly bars purchase of any part of the property of 
the deceased, either directly or indirectly, by the executor or administrator. In such a 
case, the purchase by and sale to an executor or administrator is voidable at the 
instance of any other person interested in the property.
(f). Section 311 gives the same powers, severally, to all executors or administrators in 
cases where several have been appointed by a deceased. For example, any one of 
the several executors has power to release any debt due, or to sell the property of the 
deceased whether movable or immovable. If any one executor or administrator dies, 
the powers vest in the surviving executors, in the absence of any contrary direction 
that may be contained to deal specifically in the will.29
(g). Section 314 gives the same powers to a minor appointed as an administrator as if 
he/she was appointed as an administrator who has attained the age of majority. 
Section 315 gives a married woman to whom a probate or letters of administration has 
been granted, the same powers as an ordinary executor or administrator.
5.3. Duties, Role and Responsibilities of Executors and Administrators under the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925
A few of the primary duties of an executor and administrator are set out below:
5.3.1. Aggregate inventory of estate and assessed value
An executor and administrator is tasked with the duty of taking inventory and account 
of the estate. Section 317 lays down a period of six months after a grant of probate or letters 
of administration, to provide inventory of the estate containing a true and full estimate of 
property in possession, credits due and debts owed to the deceased. It also provides a oneyear period after the grant of probate or letters of administration, to furnish accounts to the 
court of the estate showing those assets which have come into the hands of the executor or 
administrator and the manner in which they were applied for or disposed of. The inventory to 
29 Section 312 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 54
be provided under section 317 must be inclusive of all property, in any state throughout India 
and all such property must be stated separately state-wise.30
If an executor or administrator on being required by the court to exhibit an inventory or 
account under this section, intentionally fails to comply with the requisition, he would be 
deemed to have committed an offence under section 176 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) 
and the intentional provision of a false inventory or account would be deemed to be an offence 
under section 193 of the IPC. In Shernaz Faroukh Lawyer vs. Manek Daru Sukhadwala31
, the
court referred to Bai Panbai (supra) while dealing with the provisions of section 317, and held 
that an executor or administrator may be compelled to exhibit an inventory and render an 
account of his administration of the personal estate of the testator, and if accounts are 
intentionally false, the executor or administrator makes himself liable to punishment and the 
interested parties can file an action against the executor or administrator for questioning the 
correctness of the accounts32
. 
5.3.2.1. Probate – Definition 
A probate is defined under section 2(f) as the “copy of a will certified under the seal of 
a Court of competent jurisdiction with a grant of administration to the estate of the testator”. 
5.3.2.2. Importance and Applicability of a Probate 
A probate once granted is considered to legalise the will and acts as formal permission 
to the executor to transfer the properties to whom they are bequeathed. A harmonious reading 
of sections 213(1) and 57(1) reflects that a probate is mandatorily required for a will made by 
a Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, or Jaina, residing within the limits of West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, 
Assam, Madras, or Mumbai, or if property is situated therein. The provisions relating to probate 
do not apply to Muslims.
When a probate is applied for, and the will proved to be genuine, the executor is 
provided with a certificate proving that it is genuine. A probate is relevant for various reasons 
including for proving the title to an asset in the hands of a beneficiary or legatee. 
5.3.2.3. Obtaining a Probate 
The procedure to obtain probate is to be handled with great caution by a qualified 
Advocate. A probate will be granted by a competent court of law having jurisdiction, and 
requires the Advocate to deal with the court and its authorities and officers. 
Different states have different procedures to applying for and obtaining probate. Such 
procedure is usually set out in Court rules and the procedure of a testamentary suit is laid out 
30 Section 318 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
31 MANU/MH/0012/2017
32 Shernaz Faroukh Lawyer and Ors. vs. Manek Daru Sukhadwala MANU/MH/0012/2017
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 55
by the Civil Procedure Code, 1908. For example, in the city of Mumbai, the procedure for 
obtaining probate is set out in the Bombay High Court Rules. 
Typically, a petition for probate must contain a schedule of properties and credits and 
a schedule of debts of the deceased, and is accompanied by documents such as the 
executor’s oath, affidavits of consent of legal heirs, and an affidavit of at least one attesting 
witness (if available). The value of assets of deceased are mentioned and annexed to the 
petition. The value of properties movable and immovable is distinguished separately to 
ascertain the net value in Indian Rupees (INR).
The court must be satisfied that the will propounded is the final will and testament and 
there is no other. The above affidavit of the attesting witness is submitted as evidentiary 
documentation and a notice is published and served so as to invite claims by creditors and 
heirs. The Court will also verify that the executor is the person that is authorised under the will 
and not any other person. 
5.3.3. Establish solvency of the estate, pay expenses, pay off debt on priority
After grant of a probate or letters of administration the executor’s or administrator’s 
role, after taking inventory and assessing the value of the deceased’s estate, is to follow the 
rules set out in the ISA whilst distributing the estate. Sections 321 to 325 lay down an order in 
which the estate of the deceased is to be apportioned, in which expenses take priority over 
debts. These are, firstly, expenses incurred on funeral ceremonies, death-bed charges 
including medical attendance and stay for one month preceding death, that are payable33
. 
Secondly, expenses of obtaining probate and costs that may be incurred in respect of judicial 
proceedings necessary to administer estate, are to be paid34. Thirdly, wages due to any 
labourer, artisan or domestic servant, for services rendered within three months of death, are 
to be paid. And lastly, other debts according to their respective priorities35. Debts are to be 
paid before payment of legacies36
.
The executor may thereafter move a petition for permission to distribute what is left of 
the decedent's assets to the beneficiaries named in the will. This usually requires the court's 
permission, which is typically only granted after the executor has submitted a complete 
accounting of every financial transaction they have engaged in throughout the probate 
process. Save as aforesaid, no creditor shall have a right of priority over another; but the 
executor or administrator shall pay all such debts as he knows of, including his own, equally 
and in proportion as far as the assets of the deceased will extend.
33 Section 321 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
34 Section 322 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
35 Section 323 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
36 Section 325 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 56
5.3.4. Ancillary Duties & Responsibilities of an Executor or Administrator
(a). Honour specific legacies and proportionate general legacies in the manner prescribed 
by the ISA.
(b). Provide funds for the performance of funeral ceremonies of the deceased, provided 
that there is enough estate left for such purpose37
.
(c). Collect the property of the deceased and the debts that were due to him at the time he 
was living, with reasonable and due diligence.38
(d). Preparing and filing tax returns and paying taxes out of the estate. This may require 
the executor to liquidate assets. 
5.4. Chapter Review Questions
1. Who is an executor?
2. Who can be an administrator?
3. What is the difference between an administrator and an executor?
4. Enumerate the powers and duties of an executor.
5. What is probate? Who can grant probate? 
6. Is a probate compulsory?
37 Section 316 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
38 Section 319 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 57
Chapter 6: Tenancy-in-Common and 
Joint Tenancy, Transmission & 
Nomination
Learning Objectives 
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
6-1 Understand joint tenancy and tenancy-in-common in relation to holding of, and 
succession to, immovable property.
6-2 Understand the effect of joint holding, and nomination, in relation to the management 
and transmission of securities and investments.
6-3Understand the effect of nominations made in relation to holdings in a co-operative 
society ownership structure.
Topics 
6.1. Tenancy-in-Common and Joint Tenancy
6.2. Contracts – Holdings on any/either or survivor basis in bank accounts, mutual funds and 
securities 
6.2.1. Bank Accounts
6.2.2. Mutual Funds
6.2.3. Securities 
6.3. Nomination in Life Insurance Policies
6.4. Nomination in Housing Societies
6.5. Married Women’s Property Act and Estate Planning
6.6. Other Tools for Estate Planning – Power of Attorney
6.6.1. Powers of Attorney, its use and purpose
6.6.2. Types of Power of Attorney - general and special
6.6.3. Revocation of PoA
6.6.4. Limitations of PoA holder
6.6.5. PoA executed abroad
6.7. Chapter Review Questions
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 58
6.1. Tenants-in-Common and Joint Tenancy
Co-ownership is when two or more persons hold joint title to an immovable property. 
A co-owner has an inherent entitlement to possession, the right to use and enjoy and the right 
to dispose of such interest. Section 44 of TOPA39, being the governing federal law in respect 
of transfers of immovable property, applies to co-owners transfers. When a share in property 
is transferred by one co-owner, the transferee will, unless otherwise agreed, acquire the same 
right as held by the transferor, including right to joint possession or enjoyment of the property 
and right to demand partition, subject to one exception therein, being the transferee of a share 
of a dwelling house belonging to an undivided family, who not a member of the family, in which 
case such transferee is not entitled to joint possession or other common or part enjoyment of 
such dwelling house. 
However, the manner in which co-owners jointly own a property, and the passing of 
such shares, by succession or inheritance, is determined by whether they hold the property 
as tenants-in-common or as joint tenants.
Tenancy in common 
When two or more persons jointly own a property as 'tenants-in-common' each coowner: (i) has a distinct interest in the property, (ii) may possess and enjoy the property, unless 
otherwise agreed, and (iii) may freely transfer his interest in the property. Further, on the death 
of a co-owner, his interest in the property will devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, 
as the case may be, to his/her heir(s) or beneficiary(ies).
Joint-tenancy 
Essentially, joint tenants may jointly use and enjoy a property, unless otherwise 
agreed. However, the joint tenant is deemed to have an unspecified share, and the joint 
tenants hold a single unified interest in the property. Such interest cannot be bequeathed, and 
on death, the interest of the deceased co-owner will pass, by survivorship, to the surviving coowner. A joint tenant cannot bequeath his share in the property by will, and it will not pass by 
intestate succession to his heirs. A joint tenancy may be severed by a subsequent mutual 
agreement between the co-owners, whereby the co-owners agree to hold the same in 
specified shares as tenants-in-common.
The following requirements need to be fulfilled for creation of a joint tenancy:
(a). specific language in an instrument reflecting the intent to create a joint tenancy. 
Accordingly, if not specified in an instrument of transfer, or will, or agreement, as to how coowners hold, or will hold, a property, that is, as joint tenants or as tenants in common, the 
position will be that they hold, or will hold, as tenants-in-common.
(b). the interest of joint tenants must vest at the same time. 
39 Section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882: Transfer by one co-owner- where one of two or more co-owners 
of immovable property legally competent in that behalf transfers his share of such property or any interest therein, 
the transferee acquires as to such shares or interest, and so far as is necessary to give, effect to the transfer, the 
transferor’s right to joint possession or other common or part enjoyment of the property, and to enforce a partition 
of the same, but subject to the conditions and liabilities affecting at the date of the transfer, the share or interest so 
transferred. Where the transferee of a share of a dwelling house belonging to an undivided family is not a member 
of the family, nothing in this section shall be deemed to entitle him to joint possession or other common or part 
enjoyment of the house.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 59
(c). joint tenants must have undivided interests in the whole property and not separated or 
divided interests. 
(d). joint tenants must derive their interest by the same instrument. 
(e). each joint tenant must have estates of the same type and same duration. 
A joint tenancy may be created by will or by agreement. In the case of death of a joint 
tenant, his interest will devolve by survivorship, that is, devolves on the surviving joint tenants 
and not the deceased joint tenant’s heirs. 
A clear distinction between the concept of joint tenancy and tenants in common was 
dealt with by the Orissa High Court in Shridhar Ghose v Harimohan Sahu40 where the 
distinction was drawn, on the basis of the mode of creation of the interest in the property, that 
is, whether there is severance of shares amongst the co-owners, and devolution of interest of 
a deceased co-owner.
The terms ‘tenancy-in-common’ and ‘joint tenancy’ are also been dealt with in Chapter 2. 
6.2. Contracts- Holding on any/either or survivor basis in bank accounts, mutual 
funds and securities
6.2.1. Bank Accounts
While an individual/single bank account is prevalent in India, joint accounts may be 
preferred in certain cases, that is when two or more persons hold the account jointly. A joint 
account may have any of the following modes of operation: 
Either or Survivor
An account where there are two account holders, each of whom may operate it. The 
first holder is deemed to be the primary account holder. Should one joint holder die, the other 
(as survivor) will become the sole holder and may continue to operate the account. After 
demise of both holders, a nominee, if any, is entitled to claim the funds in the account, and the 
account will be closed.
Anyone or Survivor
This is akin to the ‘either or survivor’ account holding, but the account will have more 
than two joint holders, any of whom can operate. In such a case, death of a joint holder will 
not affect the account and the surviving joint holders will continue the account. If they close 
the account, the amount credited would be distributed amongst them. An example of this 
account would be a person who opens an account with his/her all family members. A 
nomination can also be made in respect of this account, which contemplates who the funds 
credited will go to post the death of all joint holders.
40 AIR 1964 Ori 141
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 60
Former or Survivor
Only the primary account holder may operate an account while he/she is alive. The 
second/joint holder may operate only after the death of the primary holder. 
Latter or Survivor
Converse of the previous account, where only the secondary account holder may 
operate an account while he/she is alive. The primary holder would be entitled to operate the 
account only after the death of the secondary holder. 
Jointly Held Account 
The account will be operated by both or all holders together. In other words, consent, 
presence, and signature of all holders is required for operations. If any joint holder dies, the 
account will be non-operational and closed. 
Jointly or Survivor
Similar to the ‘Jointly Held Account’ mode, where both or all holders will operate jointly; 
the difference being that after the death of a holder, the joint account will not close. In such 
case surviving account holder(s) may continue the account, or receive the balance and close 
it, at their option.
Minor’s Account 
More than being a joint account, it is statutorily required in case of a minor holding an 
account that an adult or guardian is joint holder and operate the same during the minority of 
the child.
Comparative Table of modes of Operation
Joint Accounts
Sr. Nature Number of 
Holders
Operation Beneficiary(ies) on 
Death 
1. Either or Survivor Two Both Survivor
2. Anyone or Survivor More than Two All Survivors
3. Former or Survivor Two First Holder Second holder
4. Latter or Survivor Two Second Holder First Holder
6. Jointly Held Account Two or more All together Survivor(s)
7. Jointly or Survivor Two or more All together Survivor(s)
8. Minor Account Two or more Adult(s) or 
Guardian(s)
Survivor(s) 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 61
6.2.2. Mutual Funds
Mutual fund units may be held solely, or jointly, with a maximum of three holders. The 
mode of operation may be either or survivor, any or survivor, or jointly. Minors cannot be joint 
holders of units.
All communications and payments (dividends, redemptions, etc.) are made to the first 
holder. If units are held in dematerialized form (that is, in a Demat account), the rules of the 
depository will apply to operations.
Either or survivor operations entitle either holder to effect transactions. In case of ‘any 
or survivor’ operations, any unit holder effect a transaction. In a joint holding, all holders must 
join in effecting a transaction. 
Irrespective of the mode of holding, a request for a nomination must be made by all 
joint holders. The right of joint holder(s) is superior to a nominee, and a nominee will be entitled 
to the units only on the death of the holder, or if there are more than one, then on the death of 
all holders. 
In a joint holding, units will pass, by ‘transmission’, to the surviving joint holder(s), if 
one of the joint holders dies. The term ‘transmission’ is the process by which units of a 
deceased unit holder are transferred to the surviving (joint) unitholders. The asset 
management company or AMC would require various documents including a death certificate, 
to be submitted for effecting the transmission.
If there are no joint holders then units would be transmitted to the nominee(s), if any. 
If there are no joint holders, and no nominees, transmission would be in favour of legal heir(s). 
However, this process would require, in addition to a death certificate and other documents 
as referred above, the submission of a probate, or letters of administration, or succession 
certificate. 
Notwithstanding any joint holding, or nomination, a unit holder is entitled to bequeath 
mutual fund units by will (subject to the applicable law of succession).
6.2.3. Securities 
Transmission of securities is transfer of ownership to a nominee, or successor, or legal 
heir, on death of the owner/holder. 
The Securities and Exchange Board of India, being the capital market regulator (SEBI) 
under its circular dated January 4, 2019, required transmission of securities in dematerialized 
form to be dealt with in accordance with the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing 
Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) (Sixth Amendment) Regulations, 2018 (SEBI 
LODR) in order to harmonize the procedure for transmission in dematerialised form, with 
transmission of securities in physical form. 
Broadly, under SEBI LODR:
(a). a succession certificate, or probate, or letters of administration, or court decree, 
as may be applicable, in terms of the ISA is prescribed as a documentary requirement 
for transmission of securities held in physical mode.
(b). On death of a sole account holder, or a joint holder, of shares in dematerialized 
form, the surviving joint holder(s), or nominee(s) or legal heir(s) would be required to 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 62
approach the Depository Participant (DP) with the requisite paperwork for transmission 
of such shares. However, if the shares were in physical form, each company in which 
such shares were held would have to be approached for transmission. 
(c). If a person leaves physical shares held jointly, the shares would pass to the 
surviving joint holder. However, the shares are held solely, then the procedure for 
transmission will depend on whether the person has made a nomination or not, and 
whether there is a probate, succession certificate or letters of administration.
(d). If there is a nomination made in respect of the shares, the nominee would have 
to submit a transmission request form and attach a death certificate attested by a 
notary. 
(e). If there is no nomination, then a duly stamped affidavit executed by all legal 
heirs, or by the identified legal heir would have to be executed if there is a probate, or 
succession certificate, or letters of administration, obtained.
(f). If there is no nominee, and no will, and shares held solely by a person, then, if 
the value of such shares per listed company does not exceed INR 200,000, a simple 
no-objection certificate is required from all legal heirs in favour of the claimant to such 
shares, or alternatively a family settlement executed and notarized by all legal heirs of 
the deceased, each of which must be submitted together with an indemnity bond. 
6.3. Nomination in Life Insurance Policies
Nomination is a process that enables a policyholder to appoint an individual i.e. the 
nominee, who can claim the proceeds of the policy, on death of the policyholder. 
Section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938 deals with nomination and provides that a policyholder 
holding life insurance on his own life, may nominate a person or persons to whom the money 
secured by the policy shall be paid on death.
A nomination can be made either at the time of buying the policy, or at any time before 
the policy matures. A nomination may be changed during the term of the policy. Such change 
should be communicated by the policyholder to the insurer and updated in its records. Where 
a nomination is cancelled or altered by an endorsement, or a bequest is made under a will, a 
notice of such change in nomination should be submitted to the insurer, as the insurer is not 
liable for any payment made under the policy to a nominee of the policy or registered in records 
of the insurer. 
If a nominee is a minor, a guardian/appointee, other than the policyholder himself, has 
to be appointed for it to be effective, and the name of such nominee must be endorsed upon 
the policy itself, based on the name of the nominee mentioned in the proposal form. However, 
a nomination, if not made at the proposal stage, can be made by way of an endorsement in 
the policy subsequently on notice to the insurer. On the receipt of such notice, the insurer will 
register the nomination and make an endorsement on the policy document.
When a policy matures during the lifetime of the policyholder or where the nominee 
dies before the policy matures for payment, the amount secured by the policy is payable to 
the policyholder, or his heirs or legal representatives or the holder of a probate, or letters of 
administration, or succession certificate. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 63
The position, in law, of a nominee of an insurance policy, has been set out in Smt. 
Sarabati Devi & Ors. vs. Usha Devi41 where the Supreme Court held that a mere nomination 
made under section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938 does not have the effect of conferring on 
the nominee any beneficial interest in the proceeds of the policy on the death of the assured, 
as nomination only indicates the hand which is authorised to receive the amount, on the 
payment of which the insurer gets a valid discharge of its liability under the policy. The amount, 
however, can be claimed by the heirs of the assured in accordance with the applicable law of 
succession.
The Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015, introduced the concept of beneficial 
nominee. The nominee in this case is the person who ultimately benefits or owns the insurance 
money. Pursuant to this amendment, when a policyholder nominates parents, spouse or 
children, then the nominee or nominees will be beneficially entitled to the amount payable by 
the insurer. The law also includes reference to rights of a nominee to collect the insurance 
money on maturity, in the event of the policyholder’s death.
6.4. Nomination in Housing Societies 
The law governing co-operative societies is state-specific, and consequently each 
state will usually have its law, and rules and procedure for nomination, by members of cooperative societies, in respect of their shares and premises. For example, the State of 
Maharashtra has the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act 1960, which allows a member 
to nominate person(s) to whom his shares and interest in the society will be transferred by the 
society on death.
Unless the state co-operative law expressly provides to the contrary, nomination does 
not create a new rule of succession, and therefore a nominee will not acquire title/ownership 
on death of the owner. A nominee is considered a trustee who has legal control over the 
property, on behalf of legal heirs, and remains in charge until the court decides as to who is 
entitled to it by relevant laws of succession.
The object of nomination is to avoid confusion in the event of disputes between heirs 
and legal representatives and to uncertainty as to with whom the society should deal with. It 
is highly advisable to make a nomination even in case of joint ownership if both owners die at 
once. 
The Supreme Court, in Indrani Wahi v Registrar of Co-operative Societies & Ors42
observed that a transfer to a nominee would have no relevance as to the issue of title between 
the legal heirs or successors to the property of the deceased and it would also open to them 
to pursue their case of inheritance in consonance with the law.
6.5. Married Women’s Property Act and Estate Planning
Under MWP Act, 1874, all the properties that belong to the married women get 
insulated and protected from all court attachments or any income tax department attachments
that the husband has run up.
41 1984 AIR SC 346
42 Indrani Wahi v Registrar of Co-operative Societies & Ors AIR 2016 SC 1969
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 64
Business people and salaried individuals with loans or liabilities, or people who want 
to protect their wife/children from creditors or relatives who might have fraudulent intentions
should opt for the MWP Act. This is also an excellent solution for a joint family setup, wherein 
there could be several complications in the ownership of property thereby increasing the scope 
of family disputes. In all such cases, a policy covered under the MWP Act gives a clear title to 
the beneficiary.
6.6. Other Tools for Estate Planning – Power of Attorney
Power of Attorney, its use and purpose
The Power of Attorney Act, 1882 defines Power of Attorney as “any instrument 
empowering a specified person to act for and in the name of the person executing it”. Power 
of attorney can be considered as a legal instrument which is granted to a person, thereby 
giving the person an authority to make a decision, or a set of decisions for the principal in 
defined matters (banking, legal, financial investment, business and other purposes). In other 
words, it enables such person to act as an agent for the principal by establishing a principalagent relationship between the two through a legally binding contract.
Need of Power of Attorney
Situations may arise in the lifetime of an individual or a person where it becomes very 
difficult to look after one’s business, professional and legal affairs. The reasons can be old 
age, poor health or disability of an individual. Other reasons can be more nuanced such as 
geographical inaccessibility to perform certain decision making and documentation necessary 
for the progression of a business or professional affair or a lack of expertise in certain domain. 
Business entities may issue power of attorney to its officials to perform professional activities 
and day-to-day legal/regulatory compliances. Power of attorney acts as a legal tool for 
authorizing confidants, professionals and officials for them to perform routine matters or 
specified duties related to property, business or financial transactions and medical care of the 
Principal on its behalf.
Types of Power of Attorney
There are two types of Power of Attorney, basis its application. A General Power of 
Attorney gives wide-ranging powers to the attorney or the agent and authorizes it to do all acts 
connected with a particular trade, business or employment. For example – say A is the 
manager of B’s firm. Under a General Power of Attorney, A’s authority extends to doing of 
everything that is necessary for carrying out the business of B’s firm.
A Special Power of Attorney gives only specific powers to the attorney or the agent 
and therefore authorizes them to do only a single act. For example – say A is employed by B, 
residing in Mumbai to recover a debt due to B in Delhi. A may adopt any legal process 
necessary for the purpose of recovering debt. Once the debt is recovered, the Special Power 
of Attorney ceases to exist, and is deemed to terminate. 
Agents represent the Principal in all property and financial matters as long as the 
Principal’s state of mind is good. In situations where the Principal becomes incapacitated in 
making decisions, the PoA agreement would deem to end automatically. If the Principal wants 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 65
the PoA to remain in effect after the person’s health deteriorates, a durable power of attorney 
needs to be entered into. 
Revocation of Power of Attorney
Power of Attorney can be revocable or irrevocable based on the clauses of the deed
executed. In a revocable PoA, the Power of Attorney is revocable at the will of the principal, 
while in an irrevocable PoA it is not revocable at the will of the principal.
The procedure for revocation has been drawn from the Indian Contract Act, 1872. 
There can be several cases in a principal-agent relationship where the relationship may be 
severed between the attorney and the authorizer. As per Section 201 of the Act, some of the 
conditions for revocation are:
• If either the Principal or the Power of Attorney holder or both become unsound of
mind, die or is/are adjudicated as insolvent by the court.
• If the Power of Attorney holder renounces his powers.
• If the business for which the Power of Attorney was granted gets completed.
Further, applying the general principles given under the law to a Power of Attorney, 
the ways through which such revocation can take place could be:
• Breach of Contract – In case of any gross mismanagement or any breach of duty on 
behalf of the agent, or if it acts beyond its scope of powers as specified in the PoA, the 
Power of Attorney can be revoked.
• Agent’s interest in the Agency – Section 202 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 is 
applicable to situations wherein the agent develops a personal interest in its agency. 
In such case, the Power of Attorney cannot be terminated without the due consent of 
such an agent.
• Actions of the Principal – The Principal brings the relationship to an end through an 
express revocation of the authority granted to an agent.
Procedure to Revoke Power of Attorney
Revocation of a PoA is generally done by first issuing a notice in a local daily 
newspaper or in a national daily. The Principal will have to get a registered cancellation deed
(registered from the office of the respective sub-registrar), and provide a copy for due 
information of such cancellation to the Agent. 
Limitations of Power of Attorney
A Power of Attorney could leave the Principal vulnerable to abuse by entrusting with the Agent
a lot of authority over the Principal’s money, property, and decision-making power. The Agent 
has a fiduciary duty to act in Principal’s best interests. 
The errors and omissions in creating a legally valid PoA exposes the Principal to unintended 
risks which do not have a legal recourse to address later. Undue authority ceded to an Agent 
or not specifying the contours of decision-making in money matters and financial affairs may 
lead to loss of control. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 66
A Power of Attorney also does not address what happens to the assets of the Principal after
his or her death. The PoA deems to end upon the Principal’s death, and so it does not do 
anything to protect Principal’s wealth or its intended distribution. 
Power of Attorney executed abroad
Power of Attorney is a perfect instrument for people living abroad and managing assets 
in India. A PoA can be executed from abroad in two ways:
Legalisation:
In this case, signatures of the notary or judge before whom the PoA is executed are required 
to be authenticated by the duly accredited representative of the Indian Embassy/Consulate. 
According to Section 3 of the Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Oaths and Fees) Act, 1948, 
notarising a deed from an authorized officer of the Indian Consulate/Embassy would be 
considered a valid notary. Such a PoA is not required to be stamped at the time of execution. 
However, it needs to be stamped within three months from the date of receipt of the PoA in 
India.
Apostalisation:
The deed of PoA executed outside India is proven through an apostalisation process which is 
governed by The Hague Convention, 1961. Also known as super legalisation, apostille is a 
certificate which confirms and verifies the signature/seal of the person who authenticated the 
document. However, this deed too needs to comply with the Indian laws such as the Indian 
Registration Act, 1908, and the Power of Attorney Act, 1882.
6.7. Chapter Review Questions
1. Comment on the principal difference between a tenancy in common and a joint 
tenancy.
2. What is ‘transmission’ in relation to mutual funds?
3. What are the legal requirements for transmission of shares credited to a Demat 
account, of a sole holder?
4. How is a nomination treated under the Insurance Act, 1938?
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 67
Chapter 7: Gifts, Trusts & Family 
Arrangements in Estate Planning 
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
7-1 Understand basic law relating to gifts of movable and immovable property
7.2 Distinguish between different types of trusts.
7-3 Understand the advantages of adopting a trust vehicle of estate planning.
7-4 Understand the value of trust structures in small/family businesses.
7-5 Understand family arrangements and settlements and their role in estate planning
Topics
7.1. Gifts
7.1.1. Inheritance Tax
7.1.2. Tax on Gifts
7.1.2.1. Moveable Property – Fair Market Value
7.1.2.2. Immovable Property – Stamp Duty
7.2. The Indian Trusts Act,1882
7.2.1. Definitions
7.2.2. Types of Trusts
7.2.2.1. Testamentary & Non-Testamentary Trusts
7.2.2.2. Public, Charitable or Religious Trusts & Private Trusts
7.2.2.3. Revocable & Irrevocable Trusts
7.2.2.4. Non-Discretionary & Discretionary Trusts
7.3. Advantages of Private Trusts
7.3.1. Planning succession
7.3.2. Ring fencing of assets
7.3.3. Tax planning
7.3.4. Protecting persons with special needs
7.3.5. Flexibility 
7.3.6. Transparency in management
7.3.7. Strategic objectives 
7.3.8. Trust as a Pass-through entity 
7.4. Exception – HUF Property 
7.5. Succession planning for small businesses
7.6. Business succession 
7.7. Offshore Trusts
7.8. Family Arrangements
7.9. Chapter Review Questions 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 68
7.1. Gifts
Section 122 of TOPA defines gift as a voluntary transfer of property inter vivos (that is 
between living persons), without compensation or any type of consideration. While a gift has 
to be voluntary, and for no consideration, it need not be made out of natural love and affection. 
Sections 123 to 129 of TOPA deal with transfers by gift, registration, revocation, and other 
matters.
A gift will effect a transfer of the entire ownership over the property, or interest therein 
that has been gifted, and donor cedes title completely. However, in the case of immovable 
properties, a donor may retain and reserve reasonable fetters during his lifetime, including 
restrictions on alienation, and/or a life interest, that is, a right of residence to the donor and 
has family members.
An instrument of gift is executed by a donor (the giver of the gift) and a donee (the 
recipient of the gift) under which movable or immoveable property is transferred.
If an immovable property above the value of INR 100 is to be gifted, the instrument of 
gift is required to be compulsorily registered. The instrument of gift must also be attested by 
two witnesses in addition to the donor and must record acceptance by the donee of the gift. 
While a gift may be effected by delivery, it is advisable to record the same in writing. 
The writing will be optionally registrable. As with immovable property, there has to be an 
acceptance of the gift, by or on behalf of the donee. Acceptance may be express or implied. 
However, it must be done during the lifetime of the donor, and while he is still legally capable 
of giving the gift. If a donee dies before accepting a gift, it is void43
. 
Other Matters Related To Gifts 
(a). A gift by a minor is void, as a minor is not considered capable of contracting. A natural 
guardian of the minor can accept a gift made to a minor on his behalf, on the condition 
that the person nominated in the gift deed will act as a manager of the gifted property.
(b). A gift cannot be revoked once it is made, except under section 126 of the TOPA.44
(c). Mohammedan law permits, with certain conditions, an oral gift to be made of 
immovable property, is known as ‘Hiba’. 
43 Section 122 of Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
44 Section 126 of Transfer of Property Act, 1882: When gift may be suspended or revoked - The donor and donee 
may agree that on the happening of any specified event which does not depend on the will of the donor a gift shall 
be suspended or revoked; but a gift which the parties agree shall be revocable wholly or in part, at the mere will of 
the donor, is void wholly or in part, as the case may be. A gift may also be revoked in any of the cases (save want 
or failure of consideration) in which, if it were a contract, it might be rescinded. Save as aforesaid, a gift cannot be 
revoked. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the rights of transferees for consideration 
without notice.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 69
7.1.1. Inheritance Tax 
Inheritance tax is typically levied on the value of assets received by legal heirs by 
inheritance (that is, both testamentary and intestate succession). Inheritance tax (known as 
‘Estate Duty’) was abolished in 1985. At present there is no inheritance tax in India.
7.1.2. Tax on Gifts
Gifts are taxable, subject to certain exemptions based on value of the gift, relationship 
between donor and donee. Under the IT Act, any amount received by an individual person or 
a HUF over Rs. 50,000/- in a financial year from an unrelated person, in cash or by way of 
credit, will be included as income. If the value of all the gifts taken together exceeds Rs 50,000, 
then, the aggregate of the gifts received become taxable without any threshold exemption. 
Similar to inheritance being not taxable, money received in contemplation of death of an 
individual or Karta or member of a HUF is also exempt from Income Tax.
Tax exemptions are provided in respect of gifts between close relatives. Consequently, 
the gift of any asset (movable or immovable) made to certain specified relatives, is exempt 
from income tax in the hand of the recipient, without limit. Close relatives includes parents, 
children, spouse, siblings, siblings of the spouse, lineal ascendants and descendants of the 
person and his/her spouse. The list also includes spouse of the abovementioned persons.
Under section 56(2) of the IT Act, if an asset is gifted to certain specified relatives 
during a person’s lifetime, there is no tax liability for the beneficiary. Similarly, any asset that 
is willed or inherited by the beneficiary is free of tax. Further, gifts received are taxable in the 
hands of recipient under the head “income from other sources” and there is no taxation for the 
donor. In this case gift means any sum of money, moveable property or immovable property 
which is received without consideration.
In Smt Geeta Dubey vs. Income-tax Officer45
, Dubey ( Assessee) received a gift of Rs 
50,000 from her father and a gift of Rs 50,000 from her sister-in-law. The assessing officer 
examined this receipt and during the assessment proceedings, the assesse had established 
the identity of both the abovementioned donors and also proved that the gifts were received 
through proper banking channels. Further, the officer also accepted the fact that since these 
were receipts from the Assessee’s father and sister-in-law, they qualified as “relatives” under 
section 56 of the IT Act. However, the assessing officer contended that the gifts would be 
subject to income tax since the occasion for which the gift was received was not declared by 
the Assesse. The same contention was upheld by the Commissioner of Income-Tax (Appeals). 
The issue was then raised for consideration before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 
(“ITAT”). The ITAT ruled that since the identity of the donors had been established and as 
they qualified as relatives for the taxpayer to claim an exemption, the need to prove by an 
explanation on the occasion for which gift was received, was not mandatory. 
45 (2018) 172 ITD 538 (Indore) (Trib.)
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 70
7.1.2.1. Movable Property – Fair Market Value 
Fair market value is the price at which property changes hands between a willing 
buyer and a willing seller, neither being under any compulsion to buy or to sell, and both having 
reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. Section (22B) of the IT Act defines “Fair Market 
Value” (FMV) as "the price that the capital asset would ordinarily fetch on sale in the open 
market on the relevant date”. To summarise, FMV is the price that an asset will sell on the 
open market. An asset's FMV should represent an accurate valuation or assessment of its 
worth. In respect of gifts, FMV is an important figure to arrive at for determination of the tax 
liability on such gift.
Determination of FMV for inventory as per the Income Tax Rules
Rule 11UAB, which came into force from April 1, 2019 and applies in relation with 
prospective effect to subsequent years provides for determination of FMV of different classes 
of assets/inventory converted into or treated as capital assets in the following manner (for the 
purpose of computation for section 28 of the IT Act):
(a). Immovable property (land or building or both): value adopted or assessed or 
assessable by any authority of the Central Government or a State Government for the 
purpose of stamp duty on the date on which the inventory is converted into, or treated, 
as a capital asset;
(b). For jewellery, archaeological collections, drawings, paintings, sculptures, any work of 
art, shares or securities referred to in rule 11UA: value determined in the manner 
provided in sub-rule (1) of rule 11UA and for this purpose the reference to the valuation 
date in the rule 11U and rule 11UA shall be the date on which the inventory is converted 
into, or treated, as a capital asset;
(c). For other property: price that it would ordinarily fetch on sale in the open market on the 
date on which the inventory is converted into, or treated, as a capital asset.
7.1.2.2. Immovable Property – Stamp Duty 
The Indian Stamp Act, 1899 is a federal law governing stamp duty in India. However, 
stamp duty being a State subject, each State has either enacted a separate state law for the 
charge and recovery of stamp duty, or has adopted the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, with Statespecific amendments. 
Stamp duty is, inter alia, chargeable upon instruments of transfer of property, and is, 
in most cases, levied ad valorem, that is on the basis of market value of the subject property. 
Rates of stamp duty will vary from state to state, and in cases of immovable properties will 
depend on factors such as the nature of the property, development potential, the user of the 
property, the age and location of, and the amenities related to, the property. Concessions are 
available to certain classes of persons and properties. 
It is relevant to know that stamp duty is a tax levied on an instrument, and not a 
transaction, or property. If an instrument is required to be stamped and is not, it would not be 
admissible in legal proceedings as evidence. An unstamped and unregistered instrument of 
transfer will not pass title to the property. A gift deed consisting of immovable property attracts 
stamp duty.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 71
Stamp Duty implications on a Gift
An instrument of gift will typically attract stamp duty in India. Rates will vary from state 
to state. An unstamped instrument of gift will not be ordered for registration, and an 
unregistered gift is void.
7.2. The Indian Trusts Act, 1882
The Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (ITA) is the principal statute governing private trusts. It 
includes provisions in relation to the creation and formation of trusts, types of trusts, the parties 
to a trust, rights and liabilities of trustees and beneficiaries, and the requirements of a valid 
trust deed. 
The ITA does not apply to a waqf and religious or charitable endowments under 
Mohammedan Law or the “mutual relations of members of an undivided family as determined 
by any customary or personal law”. State-specific legislation has been enacted by some states 
in respect of charitable and religious trusts, endowments, etc., which do not apply to private 
trusts.
Section 3 of the ITA defines a trust as “an obligation annexed to the ownership of 
property and arising out of a confidence reposed in and accepted by the owner, or declared 
and accepted by him, for the benefit of another, or of another and the owner”. Therefore, a 
trust is an agreement between two persons, under which property of one is held by the other, 
usually for the benefit of a third party (beneficiary). 
7.2.1. Definitions 
Author/Settlor 
A person who creates a trust of property owned by him is called the ‘author’ or ‘settlor’ 
of the trust. A settlor can decide upon the manner/mode and purpose of formation of the trust, 
names and number of trustees, the beneficiaries, and matters concerning management and 
administration of the trust. The settlor transfers to the trustees, the property which will be 
initially held on trust, that is, trust property or corpus as referred below.
Trustee 
A person that holds and manages trust property for the benefit of a beneficiary is known 
as its ‘trustee’. Any person capable of contracting (that is, who has attained the legal age of 
majority, being of sound mind and not disqualified by law) may act as a trustee. A trustee may 
be a living person or an artificial entity including a corporation firm, bank or other institution. 
There are also entities formed with the specific objective of assisting in establishing and 
managing trusts, and who act as trustees, known as ‘professional trustees’.
A trustee acts in a fiduciary capacity, in that he will manage the trust, and hold, deal 
with and administer trust property and income of the trust, for the benefit of its beneficiaries; 
but not for the trustee’s own benefit. A trustee, in such fiduciary capacity, holds legal title and 
ownership of trust property, both movable and immovable. Chapter III sets out the duties and 
liabilities of trustees. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 72
Protector
A settlor may not desire to be a trustee, whether for maintaining legal separation or for 
legal and tax reasons. However, for ensuring the trust is managed and administered by the 
trustees in accordance with the trust deed, and for safeguarding the interests of its 
beneficiaries, a settlor may retain oversight and control by assuming the position of, or 
appointing another person, as ‘protector’ of the trust. A protector may possess certain 
overriding or material powers under the trust deed, including removal or replacement of 
trustees and approval right over the disposal or investment of trust properties and application 
of the trust income. However, the trustees continue to be the primary functionaries of a trust 
and they alone hold the trust property.
Beneficiary 
A beneficiary is the person for whom the trust is created, and who typically receives 
income arising from the trust. A beneficiary may be an individual, group, body or association 
of persons, and even an artificial entity. The only requirement is that a beneficiary must be a 
person capable of holding property, which includes minors, persons who are disabled 
(mentally or physically) persons, and unborn children. Beneficiaries possess certain rights and 
liabilities under Chapter VI. 
Trust Property
The property transferred by a settlor for the benefit of the beneficiaries of the trust, is 
called ‘trust property’, or ‘corpus’, or the ‘trust fund’. Accretions to, and income arising out of, 
trust property, may also be included, if the trust deed provides. Trust property can be settled 
upon the trust by the settlor, and can be added to, from time to time, by the settlor and/or any 
other persons, through donations and gifts, if the trust deed provides. If a trust is irrevocable, 
a settlor cedes title and control over property settled upon the trust. 
Trust Deed
Section 3 defines a trust deed as the “instrument, if any, by which the Trust is declared”. 
A trust deed will typically contain provisions setting out the rights, powers and obligations of 
the trustees, the manner in which trust property and income will be dealt with, invested and 
applied, beneficiary distributions, successor beneficiaries, replacement and removal of and 
appointment of successor trustees, and the date of termination of the trust and distribution of 
the trust fund amongst beneficiaries. 
7.2.2. Types of Trusts
7.2.2.1. Testamentary & Non-Testamentary Trusts
A testamentary trust is created under a will, and comes into existence effect after the 
testator’s death. 
A trust created during the settlor’s lifetime is a non-testamentary trust and is usually 
created under an instrument. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 73
7.2.2.2. Public, Charitable or Religious Trusts & Private Trusts
Public Trust
A public trust is created for the benefit of the public, or a section of the public. It may 
be religious or charitable in nature. The nature of a public trust is determined by its 
beneficiaries. As public trusts may have altruistic objects, they may be conferred tax 
exemptions and benefits. A public trust may continue in perpetuity or for an indefinite period.
Private Trust
Any trust which is not a public trust is considered as a private trust. Private trusts 
cannot exist indefinitely as they are governed by the rule against perpetuity. 
7.2.2.3. Revocable & Irrevocable Trusts
Revocable Trust
A trust in which the settlor has expressly reserved the right of revocation or reassumption of the trust property is known as a revocable trust. A revocable trust may not ringfence assets and the assets of the trust may be attached in recovery of the settlor’s of debts 
under law. In addition, assets transferred to a trust by a settlor would continue to be treated 
as the settlor’s assets, under income tax law. 
Irrevocable Trust
An irrevocable trust is one where the settlor has no right to re-assume trust property, 
and the trust deed cannot be revoked or amended. In an irrevocable trust, the settlor cedes 
the ownership and control over trust property and on his death will not form part of his estate. 
7.2.2.4. Non-Discretionary & Discretionary Trusts 
Non-Discretionary Trusts
A trust in which the beneficiaries and/or their shares are also determined is known as 
a non-discretionary trust, or a determinate, or specific trust. Trustees do not have any 
discretion over the distribution of the benefits and income of such trust, amongst beneficiaries.
Discretionary Trust
A trust in which beneficiaries are not named and/or their beneficial shares not stated 
is a discretionary trust. Typically, the settlor, or trustees, or protector, will possess rights to 
decide upon the beneficiaries and/or their beneficial shares. This may be undertaken through 
a ‘letter of wishes’, or by resolutions or other writings issued by the trustees or protector. The 
trust deed may also provide conditions and parameters for determining beneficiaries and their 
beneficial shares. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 74
Other Trusts
A settlor may also adopt a flexible structure that combines elements of the broad 
categories of trusts outlined above, such as a revocable specific trust, a revocable 
discretionary trust, an irrevocable specific trust and an irrevocable discretionary trust.
7.3. Advantages of Private Trusts
Trusts have gained popularity over recent years for various reasons, including planning 
succession and safeguarding against disputes and challenges over a will, ring-fencing assets, 
tax planning and hedging against inheritance tax (if introduced). These and other benefits are 
highlighted below: 
7.3.1. Planning succession
A trust is an effective vehicle in planning succession, as assets are transferred to the 
trust during the lifetime of a settlor and will not form a part of his estate on his death (assuming 
an irrevocable trust). The apparent benefit is avoidance of disputes and litigation over the 
estate or will of the settlor after his death, and the estate being tied up for substantial time. 
While a person may not wish to settle all his assets upon trust, if there is a perception that 
ownership of certain assets may be the subject to disputes post death, he has the option to 
settle them upon trust during his lifetime, so as to ensure that, after his death, his wishes are 
implemented and not subject to challenge and dispute.
7.3.2. Ring fencing assets 
If a settlor divests ownership and control over an asset by creating an irrevocable trust, 
he, subject to certain laws, may effectively ring-fence them from tax and creditors’ claims. 
Once the asset is transferred into the irrevocable trust, it is no longer the property of the settlor. 
It is relevant to note that if a trust is created by a settlor with the primary or sole motive of 
defeating the rights and claims of the government, or of creditors, it may be subject to 
challenge, and transfer of assets to such trust could be voided, and the assets attached, 
depending upon the facts of the case, and applicable law (including bankruptcy law).
7.3.3. Tax planning
Private trusts may be created with the objective of generating wealth and income for 
certain beneficiaries and as a tool of tax planning. Further, a person may wish to divest 
ownership of assets, in view of concerns over the possible introduction of inheritance tax. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 75
7.3.4. Protecting persons with special needs
A private trust may be a tool to manage and provide for family members having special 
needs, or who are unable manage their affairs, including infants, minor children or persons 
with disabilities. 
7.3.5. Flexibility 
The trust structure provides flexibility in creation of a suitable trust tailor-made to the 
wishes and desires of the settlor. For example, in a non-discretionary trust, beneficiaries will 
have a specific beneficial share and interest, which cannot be altered. On the other hand, if 
the settlor wishes to account for changes in circumstances, or adversity, a discretionary trust 
may be a suitable choice, as it allows for flexibility in the determining beneficiaries and/or their 
beneficial shares and interest. 
7.3.6. Transparency in management 
On a trust being created, its control and management vests in its trustees, and they 
are mandated to operate within the powers and authorities granted to them under the trust 
deed, as section 11 binds them to fulfil the purposes of trust and ensure that the instructions 
of the settlor are followed. 
Section 17 further provides that trustees are bound to act impartially, and execute the 
trust for the advantage of all beneficiaries. Beneficiaries are also granted recourse under the 
ITA if they believe a trustee is not fulfilling his obligations and duties.
7.3.7. Strategic objectives 
Although, in an irrevocable trust, a settlor cedes title and control over trust property, 
he may retain effective control and management over it and the trust, through the trust deed, 
and through a ‘protector’ (which may be the settlor himself). A settlor can allocate and 
apportion trust assets in a manner that suits his strategic objectives and to provide control the 
extent and manner beneficiaries will derive benefits. 
7.3.8 Trust as a pass-through entity
Trusts are commonly used as vehicles to pool investments such as holdings of 
securities and mutual funds. A tax pass through mechanism is a fairly common advantage, 
where income generated by the trust, passes to the beneficiaries tax-free, and is taxed in their 
hands. 
Sections 115 UA and 115 UB of the IT Act, provide that the distribution of income by a 
business trust or investment fund to its unit holders/investors is to be made without any 
deduction of tax. This would, however, not apply to a revocable trust.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 76
Trusts have also been used as alternate investment funds (AIFs), real estate 
investment trusts (REITs) and infrastructure investment funds (“InvIT’s) in view of such pass 
through mechanism. Under regulation (2)(1)(b) of the SEBI (Alternative Investment Funds) 
Regulations, 2012, an AIF can be established as a trust in addition to a company, LLP or body 
corporate. Prior to the introduction the Finance Act, 2015, all AIFs were not considered to be 
eligible for “pass through status”, whereas trusts were accorded such status. Even after the 
eligibility criteria was extended to AIFs formed by companies and LLPs, the trust structure is 
preferred as the other entities are governed by more stringent legislation such as the 
Companies Act, 2013 or the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008. 
While choosing a suitable structure to set up an AIF through a trust structure, factors 
such as determinacy and revocability are essential. An irrevocable determinate Trust is 
appropriate as there is no discretion vested in the trustee to terminate the trust. Beneficiaries 
are also ascertained and identified, easing the reporting of pass through income.
7.4. Exception – HUF property
The exception carved out by section 1 of “mutual relations of members of an undivided 
family” is generally understood to apply to HUF property. If a trust is sought to be created by 
a settlor for holding any HUF property, the settlor does not possess legal right and interest 
over the same and therefore the subject matter of the Trust will be unlawful. 
7.5. Succession planning for small businesses
Establishing an effective plan for succession that is sustainable is essential for owners 
or proprietors of small businesses and assumes even greater significance for small family 
businesses. 
If a family business is held by a corporation, a non-testamentary trust may be a suitable 
vehicle to hold the shares of such company. A trust as shareholder would efficiently collect 
and distribute dividend income between family members who are its beneficiaries, maintain 
oversight and control over the company’s management, and also, if required, retain control 
over key decisions over investment, expansion and divestment. Its trustees would act in the 
common interest of all beneficiaries. This would avoid the inherent issues that sometimes arise 
with a disparate group of shareholders who may hold varying views and opinions on such 
matters, and which may create a potential for disputes and a resultant loss to the operations 
and value of the family business.
7.6. Business Succession 
The aim of every business is to maintain growth, profitability and longevity. In a report 
published in 2018, Credit Suisse observed that India was home to the third largest number of 
family owned businesses in the world with an estimated total of 111 companies with a total 
market capitalization of USD 839 billion. The shareholding pattern of a majority of listed Indian 
firms comprised promoters holding a controlling stake in family held businesses and family 
members or distant relatives from extended families occupying prime managerial positions. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 77
In this scenario, there is a need for family-owned and managed business to provide for 
a smooth and seamless planned transition and succession to persons appointed and chosen 
by the owner. While strong internal relationships based on trust and understanding are 
essential for a hand over to a succeeding generation, a comprehensive business succession 
plan will facilitate a smooth inter-generational transfer, reduce intra-family conflicts and 
disputes, enable continuity and preserve and maintain wealth created by prior generations. 
A robust business succession plan can be coupled with a trust structure, include 
appointment of successors, or trustees responsible for the functioning of the business (who 
may also be family members), establish guidelines for business operations and distribution of 
income or dividends and allow for retention of management control. 
Such a plan can also: (i) create clear divisions between members’ personal and 
professional responsibilities, (ii) determine professional roles and duties, (iii) demarcate 
ownership interests/shares, (iv) provide transparent functioning and reporting, including with 
respect to business decisions, (iv) establish an efficient dispute resolution mechanism, and (v) 
provide for independent expert advice, including through a trust structure.
Disputes over intellectual property rights (IPRs) of family business are not unusual, 
especially when there is division of businesses between family members, with each claiming 
rights over the IPR. A business succession plan can provide for this, with a family trust holding 
the IPR having family members as its beneficiaries. Such trust would provide for 
apportionment between beneficiaries of royalty generated, non-compete agreements and 
concurrent use of the IPR, including for same/different classes of goods/services.
7.7. Offshore Trusts
With an increase of high net-worth individuals (HNI’s) holding assets in India and 
overseas, the cross boundary ramifications of a trust structure, from a tax and regulatory 
aspect, require consideration. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI), through the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999 (FEMA) and Exchange Control Regulations, controls cross border 
transfer of funds and regulates the parties to a trust on the basis of residential status.
An offshore trust, in the Indian context, is a trust formed outside India by an Indian 
resident, and, in addition to the laws of the resident jurisdiction, will be subject to such Indian 
exchange control laws and regulations as well as Indian taxation law. Other legislations such 
as the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 and Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign 
Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015 should also be considered in relation to 
a foreign trust.
FEMA allows an Indian resident to hold, own, transfer or invest in foreign currency, 
security and also immovable property outside India if such assets were owned, held or 
acquired by him while he was a resident outside India or if he has inherited property from a 
person who was resident outside India. If an Indian resident wishes to transfer funds and 
property to an offshore trust, he may do so through the Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS), 
under which upto USD 250,000 per person per financial year may be remitted overseas 
without RBI permission. 
Based on the complexity of options available in a trust structure, factors such as 
residency status of beneficiaries and location of assets play an important role in deciding the 
best suited entity, which is also tax efficient in both India and abroad. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 78
7.8. Family Arrangements
A family arrangement or settlement is a vehicle adopted by families to agree to and 
effect distribution and transfer of businesses and/or assets (movable and/or immovable) 
between their members. The arrangement or settlement is effectively a ‘contract’ in law. It may 
provide for immediate transfers of any or all business, assets or properties, and/or contemplate 
transfers in future, including a specified date, or during a specific time period, or on the 
occurrence of an event such as the death of particular family member or a combination of 
them.
There is no ‘one size fits all’ in a family arrangement or settlement, each family having 
its own objectives. However, while these may vary, the prime motive is usually to settle existing 
disputes, or avoid potential and future disputes arising, between family members, especially 
when a family has grown and succeeding generations have come into existence, and/or are 
actively involved. 
A family arrangement or settlement, based on its objectives, may involve all, or select, 
family members, and/or some or all businesses, assets, and properties. Accordingly, the 
instruments that may be employed will vary. Typically, these may include all, or a combination, 
of the following:
(a). a memorandum or an agreement of family arrangement which either sets out 
the acts, deeds, matters and things to be completed, or which itself operates as an 
instrument of transfer of any or all assets. Stamp duty and registration would be 
attracted on such instrument of a transfer of any assets are effected.
(b). instruments of gift under which assets and properties, or a share or interest 
therein, are gifted;
(c). instruments creating a private trust for the benefit of certain family members 
and/or their children and/or future generations, and/or the transfer to such trust assets 
and properties, or a share or interest therein;
(d). instruments of sale and transfer, for transfer of assets and properties, or a 
share or interest therein;
(e). an instrument setting out a business succession plan, including management 
goals, expansion, and rights and obligations of family members; 
(f). one or more wills bequeathing assets and properties, or a share or interest 
therein (though as stated in Chapter 4, a will can be altered and replaced with a new 
will); and,
(g). a memorandum or recording of the family arrangement or settlement, which 
serves, inter alia, as recording of all acts, deeds, matters and things done and 
completed in effecting and completing the same. Such instrument does not require 
compulsory registration under the Registration Act, as long as it does not effect 
transfers of assets or properties, or is an agreement or contract to do so. 
If disputes arise between parties to a family arrangement or settlement, or a party fails 
or refuses to adhere or comply, the arrangement or settlement being a ‘contract’, it would have 
to be settled, or enforced, through a dispute resolution process. If there is an instrument that 
records the arrangement or settlement, and it expressly provides that disputes will be 
addressed and settled by mediation and/or arbitration, then the same would govern, failing 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 79
which disputes would have to be resolved by adopting proceedings before a court of 
competent jurisdiction.
In designing, formulating and implementing a family arrangement and settlement, 
various factors have to be taken into consideration, in addition to the motives, objectives, 
wishes and desires of family members. These include taxation, stamp duty, registration, and 
applicability of laws, rules, and regulations, or contractual conditions or covenants, that impact, 
and/or impose conditions or restrictions on transfer of businesses, assets and properties. 
7.9. Chapter Review Questions
1. How is a gift of immovable property made?
2. What are the elements applied in relation to stamp duty payable upon an instrument 
of gift?
3. What is a trust?
4. Who can be a trustee?
5. How are testamentary trust and a non-testamentary trusts created?
6. What is the primary difference between a revocable trust and an irrevocable trust?
7. How does a business succession plan assist a family owned business?
8. How do trusts help in managing family owned business IPR? 
9. What is an offshore trust and what assets can it hold? How can it be funded?
10. Enumerate the instruments that may be employed in a family arrangement. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 80
Answers to Chapter Review Questions 
Chapter 1
1. The different types of succession by which the property of a deceased will devolve is 
testamentary succession, that is a valid will which provides the terms for devolution of 
property, or by intestate succession, where there is no will, or an invalid will. In case of 
intestate succession property will devolve according to the personal laws of intestate 
succession governing the deceased. 
2. There are three different types of domicile: (i) domicile of origin, (ii) domicile of choice, 
and (iii) domicile by operation of law. 
3. Section 6 of the ISA provides that for the purpose of succession, an individual may 
have only one domicile.
4. The ISA provides that the original domicile of a legitimate child will be the country of 
domicile of the father, at the time of the child’s birth, and the domicile of an illegitimate 
child, will be the country of domicile of the mother, at the time of the child’s birth.
5. The principle difference between lineal and collateral consanguinity is: (i) lineal 
consanguinity exists between two people who have either ascended or descended in 
a direct line from the other, and (ii) collateral consanguinity exists between two people 
who have neither ascended or descended in a direct line from the other, but have 
descended from a common ancestor.
6. A person will have died intestate if (i) he or she has died without a will (also known as 
total intestacy), (ii) where there is a will not dealing with the entire estate, in which case 
a person will be deemed to have died intestate in respect of the part of his or her estate 
that is not dealt with in the will (this is known as partial intestacy), and (ii) where there 
is a will that is invalid in whole or part, also known as partial intestacy.
7. Yes, a will can be partially void to the extent of invalid bequests. The invalid bequests 
will not operate and will have no legal effect. 
8. Immovable property is governed by the principle of lex situs under section 5(1) thereof, 
which provides that devolution of immovable property in India will be governed by the 
laws of India regardless of domicile at the time of death, and moveable property will 
be governed by the principle of lex domicilli under section 5(2), which provides that 
devolution of moveable property will be governed by the laws of the country in which 
the deceased was domiciled at death.
9. A succession certificate is granted by a court, to heirs, to establish authenticity and 
their entitlement to an inheritance. It is granted by a District Court pursuant to a petition 
and may be granted to a person of sound mind, not being a minor and having interest 
in the property of the deceased.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 81
10. While granting letters of administration, preference is given to the widow/widower, then 
to persons beneficially entitled to the estate, failing which, to (a) creditor(s). It will be 
granted to person who has the best title to the estate.
Chapter 2
1. Intestate succession for Hindus, Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists is governed by the HSA, 
while testamentary succession for them is governed by the ISA. Testamentary and 
intestate succession for Muslims is governed by uncodified Mohammedan law. 
Testamentary and intestate succession for Parsis, Indian Christians and persons 
married under the Special Marriages Act, 1954 is governed by the ISA.
2. The HSA applies to Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs and Jains by religion, and other person 
who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion. 
3. No, the HSA only governs intestate succession while testamentary succession for such 
groups is governed by the ISA. 
4. A HUF comprises a common ancestor and lineal male descendants, their wives and 
daughters. 
5. When distributing the property of a deceased, full blood relatives are preferred over 
half blood relatives. In the absence of both relatives, property goes to uterine blood 
relatives.
6. If two persons die at the same time making it impossible to know who survived whom, 
it is assumed that the younger of the two deceased survived the elder.
7. According to section 8, the property must be first distributed amongst the heirs falling 
under class I, failing which class II heirs, failing which amongst agnates, and, lastly, 
cognates of the deceased.
8. The Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 introduced several changes including, 
grant of equal coparcenary rights to females, abolition of survivorship, allotment of 
shares in coparcenary property to females equal to males, right of a female to claim 
partition. 
9. The Quran, the Sunna, Ijma and Qiyas are considered the primary sources of Muslim 
law in India. There are mainly two different schools of Muslim law divided on the basis 
of the sects formed after the death of Prophet Mohammed, (i) the Sunni school of law, 
and (ii) the Shia school of law. These schools are further subdivided into schools based 
on sects.
10. A will must be in respect of property capable of being transferred and which exists at 
the time of the testator’s death. Only one-third the estate may be bequeathed by will, 
subject to certain conditions and exceptions as prescribed by Shia law and Sunni law. 
Under Shia law, a testator can only dispose of the one-third to an heir or a complete 
stranger (non-heir), without the consent of heirs. Any bequest in excess of one-third, 
whether to an heir or a complete stranger, cannot take effect and is invalid, unless all 
other heirs consent. Such consent may be given before or after the testator’s death. 
Under Sunni law, a testator may dispose up to one-third of his estate only to a stranger, 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 82
without having to obtain consent of other heirs. However, bequest of up to one-third of 
property to an heir will require consent of the other heirs after the testator's death.
11. Under Sunni law, when property is bequeathed to a child in the womb and the child is 
not born within six months of the testator’s death, the bequest will lapse. Under Shia 
law, if property is bequeathed to a child in the womb, the bequest is valid if the child is 
born within 10 lunar months.
12. Under Sunni law, a bequest in favour of a person who caused the death of the testator, 
whether intentionally or accidentally, will not take effect; whereas under Shia law, the 
bequest will not take effect only when the death of the testator has been caused 
intentionally. 
Chapter 3
1. Anyone who is of sound mind and has attained the legal age of majority can dispose 
of their property by a will. 
2. Part I deals with intestate succession as applicable to Christians, Parsis and Jews and 
Part VI deals with testamentary succession as applicable to wills made by the same 
groups as well as Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs and Jainas, subject to territorial exceptions. 
3. A lapsed legacy fails to take effect as a result of the death of a legatee before the death 
of the testator or before the legacy is payable. 
4. Inheritance is the passing of the title to an estate upon death, and a bequest is the act 
of bequeathing or leaving a thing under a will.
5. The rule against perpetuity is contained in section 114, which provides that any 
bequest will be invalid where vesting of interest in property bequeathed is delayed 
beyond the lifetime of any persons living at the date of the testator's death and the 
minority of some person who shall be in existence at the expiration of that period and 
to whom, if he attains full age, will own/inherit the bequeathed property. It applies to 
movable and immovable property. Section 14 of TOPA also provides for it, and limits 
the maximum time period beyond which property cannot be transferred.
6. A bequest of a specified part of a property is a specific legacy, and the bequest of a 
certain sum arising from any property is a demonstrative legacy. If specified property 
is given, the legacy is specific, and if the legacy to be paid out of specified property, it 
is demonstrative. Example - If A bequeaths all his residential properties to B it is a 
specific legacy, If A bequeaths a monthly maintenance to B, payable out of rent arising 
out of commercial properties, it is a demonstrative legacy. 
Chapter 4
1. A will is an instrument of testamentary succession, which specifies the manner in which 
the property of the testator (maker of the will) will devolve after his or her death, that 
is, the distribution of the property of the deceased and in what proportion and manner. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 83
2. The law broadly recognizes and classifies wills as follows: 
(i) Privileged Will and Unprivileged Will: Under section 65 a privileged will may be made 
in extraordinary circumstances like war or a dangerous expedition. Such will may be 
made orally or in writing. An unprivileged will is one made by a person who does not 
fall within the exception carved out for privileged wills.
(ii) Contingent Will: It becomes effective on the occurrence or fulfilment of a specified 
condition or contingency mentioned therein, non-fulfilment of which renders the will 
inoperative. 
(iii) Concurrent Will: Two wills written by the same person, each will providing 
instructions on how certain assets of the testator are to be distributed. 
(iv) Mutual Will: A will executed by two persons (both testators) who mutually agree on 
certain terms and conditions and confer reciprocal benefits on each other, making each 
other legatees. The terms and conditions of such a will are binding on the surviving 
testator after the death of the other. 
(v) Joint Will: A will made by two or more persons for determining how their joint estate 
will devolve upon their beneficiaries. It must stipulate conditions in the case of death 
of one of the testators. If the will is to take effect after the death of two or more persons, 
then it is not enforceable during the lifetime of the other(s). The surviving testator(s) 
is/are bound to the terms and provisions of the will, as they can only be altered or 
amended with consent by both or all testators.
(vi) Holograph Will: A will that is entirely handwritten. 
(vii) Duplicate Will: Two or more copies of a will executed by a testator. Usually one 
copy is kept with the testator and the other with another person.
3. The key ingredients of a valid will are: (i) the testator must be a major, (ii) the will must 
be a legal declaration of the testator’s intention; (iii) that declaration must be with 
respect to the testator’s property; (iv) the desire expressed that the declaration should 
be effectuated after his death, (v) signed by the testator in the presence of two or more 
witnesses, who are subsequently required to attest, (vi) the testator should be of sound 
mind and disposing capacity, and not be subject to fraud, coercion, compulsion or 
duress at the time of making the will.
4. It is not mandatory to register a will under section 18 of the Registration Act. Wills are 
included in the category documents of which registration is optional. Due to this 
exclusion from mandatory registration, the genuineness of a will in India cannot be 
challenged on the grounds of its non-registration.
5. A codicil is a written document that is executed by a person to modify, add to, amend, 
clarify, or revoke provisions of a previously executed will. A codicil effectuates a 
change in an existing will without requiring a new will.
6. In order to modify, alter or amend a will, the testator may do any of the following: (i) 
overwrite the original will which will require signatures of the attesting witnesses, (ii) 
prepare a supplemental document known as a codicil, or (ii) execute a new will. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 84
Chapter 5
1. An executor of a will is defined by section 2(c), as a person to whom the execution of 
the last will of a deceased person is by, the testator’s appointment, confided. An 
executor derives his authority from the will and is appointed by the testator to fulfil the 
last wishes of the testator as prescribed by his or her will and ensure that his estate is 
distributed in accordance with the will.
2. Section 2(a) defines an administrator as a person appointed by the competent authority 
to administer the estate of the deceased person when there is no executor.
3. There is no difference between an executor and an administrator in terms of their 
duties. The difference is with respect to their appointment, that is, an executor is 
nominated by the will of a deceased, failing which, or in case there is no will, 
an administrator may be appointed by a court to manage or administer the deceased’s 
estate.
4. Powers of an executor: 
The powers of an executor are contained in Chapter VI. An executor may sue to 
recover debts in respect of all cause of action that survive the deceased, prosecute or 
defend any action or special proceeding subject to certain exceptions, dispose of 
property, distribute the estate in accordance with the will, and exercise general powers 
of administration including expenditure on acts necessary for the administration of the 
estate.
Duties of an executor: 
The executor’s duties are contained in Chapter VII. After taking inventory and 
assessing the value of the estate, an executor is to ensure compliance order set out in 
which the estate is to be apportioned with regard to debts and expenses. Firstly, 
expenses incurred on funeral ceremonies, death-bed charges including medical 
attendance and stay for one month preceding death, are to be paid. Secondly, 
expenses of obtaining probate and costs that may be incurred in respect of judicial 
proceedings necessary to administer estate, are to be paid. Thirdly, wages due to any 
labourer, artisan or domestic servant, for services rendered within three months of 
death, are to be paid. And lastly, other debts according to their respective priorities 
need to be discharged. Further, debts are to be paid before payment of legacies. When 
all these steps have been completed, the executor can move a petition for permission 
to distribute what is left of the assets to the beneficiaries under the will. 
5. 'Probate' means a copy of a will certified under the seal of a court of competent 
jurisdiction with a grant of administration of the estate of the testator. A probate can be 
granted only to the executor appointed under the will. A probate is granted to an 
executor or executors (in succession, in case more than one is named), by the 
appropriate High Court, with a copy of the will attached. One can apply for 
a probate any time after seven days of the death of the testator. 
6. Section 57 provides that a will is required to be probated from the competent court, 
subject to the exceptions contained therein. The property should be transferred on the 
basis of such probate to avoid any future litigation. A conjoint reading of sections 
213(1) and 57(1) establishes that a probate is mandatory in respect of a will made by 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 85
a Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, or Jain, residing within the limits of West Bengal, Bihar, 
Orissa, Assam, Madras, or Mumbai, or if any property is situate therein. 
Chapter 6
1. When two or more persons jointly own property they may hold it as 'tenants-incommon' or as ‘joint-tenants’. The share and interest of a tenant-in-common may be 
bequeathed, or in the absence of a will, such share and interest will pass, by 
succession, to the heirs of the deceased co-owner. However, in a joint tenancy, the 
co-owners/joint tenants hold a single unified interest in the property which cannot be 
bequeathed by will, or pass by succession (if there is no will). The interest of a 
deceased co-owner will only pass by survivorship to the surviving co-owner. 
2. The term ‘transmission’ is the process whereby units in mutual funds, held by a 
deceased, are transferred either to the surviving unitholder, or to a nominee, or to the 
legal heirs. Mutual fund units can be held as either solely or jointly (upto a maximum 
of three holders) and the mode of operation could be either or survivor; any or survivor 
or on joint basis. 
3. On the death of the sole holder, and in the absence of a nomination, the legal heir(s) 
of the deceased would have to approach the Depository Participant (DP) with the 
requisite documents for transmission of the shares. This would include a duly stamped 
affidavit executed by all the legal heirs, or by the identified legal heir if there is a 
probate, or succession certificate, or letters of administration, obtained. However, if the 
value of the shares per listed company does not exceed INR 200,000, a simple noobjection certificate is required from all legal heirs in favour of the claimant to such 
shares, or alternatively a family settlement executed and notarized by all legal heirs of 
the deceased, each of which must be submitted together with an indemnity bond. If 
there is a nomination made, the nominee would have to submit a transmission request 
form and attach a death certificate attested by a notary.
4. A nominee, may claim the proceeds of an insurance policy on the death of the 
policyholder. Section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938 provides that the policyholder who 
holds a policy of life insurance of his/her own life, may nominate the person or persons 
to whom the money secured by the policy shall be paid in the event of his/her death. 
Where a nomination is cancelled or altered by an endorsement, or a bequest is made 
under a will, a notice of a change in the nomination should be submitted to the insurer, 
as it is not liable for payments to the nominee registered in its records.
Chapter 7
1. Section 122 of TOPA defines a gift as a voluntary transfer of property from one person 
to another without compensation or any kind of consideration. A gift of immovable 
property having a value of INR 100 or more, has to be made by a registered instrument 
of gift executed by the donor and the donee and attested by two witnesses. The donee 
must accept the gift. No love and affection is necessary to make a gift, and all that is 
required is that it is voluntary and for no consideration or compensation.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 86
2. The elements include the age of the property, the location of the property, the age and 
gender of the owner, the user of the property, the type of property and the amenities 
attached to the property.
3. A trust is created when there is an agreement between persons, under which property 
of one is held by another or others, for the benefit of a third party(ies), known as 
beneficiary(ies). The parties to a trust include, the author or settlor, trustee(s), and 
beneficiary(ies). A trust may also have a protector. 
4. Any person who is competent to contract, that is, of sound mind, having attained the 
age of majority and not being disqualified under law, may be a trustee.
5. A testamentary trust is created under a will, and comes into existence on the death of 
the maker of the will (testator). A non-testamentary trust is created during the lifetime 
of the settlor under an instrument (usually a trust deed).
6. In a revocable trust, the settlor retains control over the trust property, and may reassume ownership over the same. In an irrevocable trust the settlor cedes control and 
ownership over the trust property. 
7. A business succession plan, which may include the creation of a trust, will attempt to 
achieve sustainability, continuity and a seamless transfer of control and management. 
Coupled with such plan, a private family trust can be created to: (i) hold ownership of 
the business, (ii) provide for the beneficial interest/share of each family member, (iii) 
regulate and oversee management of the business, (iv) provide for distributions to 
family members of income arising out of the business, (v) provide a demarcation 
between beneficiaries personal and professional responsibilities, and (vi) generally 
improve governance.
8. Disputes over IPR of a family business are not unusual after the death of a founder or 
owner, and/or when there is a split in family businesses. Trust ownership of IPR is 
efficient, and can enable apportionment of royalties between its beneficiaries and 
manage and control the use and enjoyment of the IPR, including non-compete 
agreements and concurrent use of IPR, whether for the same, or for different classes 
of, goods and services.
9. An offshore trust is a trust formed outside India by an Indian resident and is governed 
by Indian foreign laws and tax laws, in addition to the laws of the resident jurisdiction. 
Indian law permits an Indian resident to hold, own, transfer or invest in foreign 
currency, security and also immovable property outside India if such assets were 
owned, held or acquired by him while he was resident outside India or if he has 
inherited property from a person resident outside India. An Indian resident can, without 
RBI approval, also fund an offshore trust through the Liberalised Remittance Scheme 
(LRS), which permits investment abroad upto USD 250,000 per person per financial 
year. 
10. Each family arrangement or settlement will have its own objectives and requirements 
and therefore the instruments employed will depend upon these factors. Typically, any 
one or more of the following instruments may be employed: (a). a memorandum or an 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 87
agreement of family arrangement; (b). instruments of gift; (c). instruments creating a 
private trust; (d). instruments of sale and transfer; (e). an instrument setting out a 
business succession plan, management goals, expansion, etc.; (f). wills; and, (g). a 
memorandum or recording of the family arrangement or settlement. 
Disclaimer 
This module is intended to provide a general overview and understanding of certain 
provisions of law, and other legal principles, as referred herein, as they stood on the date this 
module was written. All laws and legal principles are subject to amendment and change at 
any time, and therefore the provisions of law and legal principles referred herein are also 
subject to change. This module is not intended to, and does not, provide legal instruction or 
advise, or induce, or encourage the reader to impart any legal instruction or advise to any 
persons. Any persons who reads this module, including financial planners, financial advisors, 
estate planners, professionals, and students, unless otherwise separately qualified to practice 
law in their jurisdiction and of good standing, must not impart or attempt to impart any legal 
advice or consultancy, to any persons, and should request such persons to consult a qualified 
lawyer of good standing. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 88
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 2
India-Specific Estate Planning
FPSB Licensed Materials
Copyright © 2018-2020 Financial Planning Standards Board. All rights reserved.
This publication may not be duplicated in any way without the express written consent of the 
publisher. The information contained herein is for the personal use of the reader and may 
not be incorporated in any commercial programs, other books, databases, or any kind of 
software or any kind of electronic media including, but not limited to, any type of digital 
storage mechanism without written consent of the publisher or authors. Making copies of this 
material or any portion for any purpose other than your own is a violation of United States 
copyright laws.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 3
Table of Contents
Table of Contents 3
Preface 10
Chapter 1: Introduction to Hindu Law, Muslim Law and The Indian Succession Act, 
1925 11
Learning Objectives 11
Topics 11
1.1. Laws of Inheritance 11
1.2. Hindu Law 12
1.3. Mohammedan Law/Muslim Law 12
1.1.4.1. Indian Succession Act, 1925 - Applicability to Different Religions 13
1.4.2. Lex Situs & Lex Domicilli 13
1.4.3. Domicile of Origin 13
1.4.4. Acquisition of new domicile 14
1.4.5. Domicile of Choice and Domicile by Operation of Law 14
1.4.6. Consanguinity or Kindred 15
1.4.6.1. Lineal consanguinity 15
1.4.6.2. Collateral consanguinity 15
1.4.7. Mode of computing degree of kindred 16
Illustrations 16
1.5. Intestate Succession & Testamentary Succession 16
1.6. Wills – General Overview 17
1.7. Succession Certificates & Letters of Administration 18
Succession Certificates 18
Letters of Administration 19
1.8 Mutation and process of distribution of Estate 19
1.9. Chapter Review Questions 20
Chapter 2: Laws of Succession Based on Religion 21
Learning Objectives 21
Topics 21
2.1. The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 21
2.1.1. Principle of Propinquity (Proximity of relationship) 22
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 4
2.1.3. General rules of Succession (on priority) 22
(a). Full-blood relations are preferred over half-blood relations: 22
(b). Right of a child in womb: 23
(c). Presumption in case of simultaneous death: 23
(d). Mode of succession of two or more heirs: 23
2.1.3.1. Order of distribution of shares amongst Class I and Class II heirs 23
2.1.3.2. Distribution of shares between heirs in Class I and Class II 24
2.1.3.3. Order of succession among ‘agnates’ and ‘cognates’ 24
2.1.3.4. Blood relationships (Full Blood, Half Blood, Uterine Blood) 25
2.2. Hindu Undivided Family, Ancestral and Self-Acquired Property 25
2.2.1. Hindu Undivided Family 25
2.2.2. Constituents of a HUF 26
Coparceners 26
Karta 26
2.2.3. Types of Property under Uncodified Hindu Law 26
Ancestral Property 26
Joint Family Property 26
Self-acquired Property 26
Nature of Ancestral Property & Self-acquired Property 27
2.3. Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 27
2.4. The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 (Sharia Act) 28
2.4.1. Primary Sources of Muslim Law in India 28
2.4.2. Bequest of property by will (Wasiyatnama) 29
2.4.3. Requirement of consent in case of bequest of one-third of property 29
2.4.4. Bequest of property where a testator has no heirs 29
2.4.5. Manner of abatement of legacy in case bequest exceeds one-third without 
consent of heirs 30
2.4.6. Bequest to a child in womb is valid 30
2.4.7. Bequest of property to an heir causing the testator's death 30
2.5. Chapter Review Questions 30
Chapter 3: Salient Features of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 in Testamentary and 
Intestate Succession 31
Learning Objectives 32
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 5
Topics 32
3.1. Introduction 32
3.2. Definitions 33
Will 33
Testator 33
Legatee 33
Codicil 33
Executor 33
Administrator 33
Probate 33
Letters of Administration 34
Minor 34
3.3. Applicability of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 34
Succession for Hindus 34
Succession for Muslims 34
Succession for Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists 34
Succession for Christians, Parsis and Jews 34
3.4.1. Persons capable of making a Will 34
General Principles 35
Illustrations 35
3.4.2. Animus testandi 36
3.4.3. Lapse of Legacy 36
Illustrations 36
3.4.4. Bequest made to a class of persons 36
Illustrations 37
3.4.5. Rule against perpetuity 37
Illustrations 37
3.4.6. Onerous, Independent & Contingent Bequests 37
Onerous Bequests 37
Illustration 38
Independent Bequests 38
Illustration 38
Contingent Bequests 38
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 6
Illustrations 38
3.4.7. Specific & Demonstrative Legacy 38
Specific Legacy 38
Illustrations 39
Demonstrative Legacy 39
Illustrations 39
Order of payment when legacy directed to be paid out of fund the subject of 
Specific Legacy 39
Illustration 39
3.5.1. General Rules of Intestacy 40
3.5.2. Rules specific to Parsis dying Intestate 40
3.6. Chapter Review Questions 41
Chapter 4: Types of Wills & Requirements of a Valid Will 41
Learning Objectives 42
Topics 42
4.1. Introduction 42
4.2. Classification of Wills 43
Privileged Will 43
Unprivileged Will 43
4.3. Types of Unprivileged Wills 43
4.3.1. Contingent Will 43
4.3.2. Concurrent Will 44
4.3.3. Mutual Wills & Joint Wills 44
Mutual Will 44
Joint Will 44
4.3.4. Holograph Will 45
4.3.5. Duplicate Will 45
4.4. Requirements of a valid Will 45
4.5. Duly and validly executed Will 46
4.6. Attestation 47
4.7. Appointment of an Executor 48
4.8. Amending a Will 49
Codicils 49
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 7
New Will 50
4.9. Chapter Review Questions 50
Chapter 5: Administration of an Estate 51
Learning Objectives 51
Topics 51
5.1. The Executor – Legal representative in a fiduciary capacity 51
5.2. Powers of an Executor or Administrator 52
5.3. Duties, Role and Responsibilities of Executors and Administrators under 
the Indian Succession Act, 1925 53
5.3.1. Aggregate inventory of estate and assessed value 53
5.3.2.1. Probate – Definition 54
5.3.2.2. Importance and Applicability of a Probate 54
5.3.2.3. Obtaining a Probate 54
5.3.3. Establish solvency of the estate, pay expenses, pay off debt on priority
55
5.3.4. Ancillary Duties & Responsibilities of an Executor or Administrator 56
5.4. Chapter Review Questions 56
Chapter 6: Tenancy-in-Common and Joint Tenancy, Transmission & Nomination 57
Learning Objectives 57
Topics 57
6.1. Tenants-in-Common and Joint Tenancy 57
Tenancy in common 58
Joint-tenancy 58
6.2. Contracts- Holding on any/either or survivor basis in bank accounts, 
mutual funds and securities 59
6.2.1. Bank Accounts 59
Either or Survivor 59
Anyone or Survivor 59
Former or Survivor 59
Latter or Survivor 60
Jointly Held Account 60
Jointly or Survivor 60
Minor’s Account 60
Comparative Table of modes of Operation 60
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 8
6.2.2. Mutual Funds 61
6.2.3. Securities 61
6.3. Nomination in Life Insurance Policies 62
6.4. Nomination in Housing Societies 63
6.5. Married Women’s Property Act and Estate Planning 63
6.6 Other Tools for Estate Planning – Power of Attorney 64
6.6.1. Powers of Attorney, its use and purpose 64
6.6.2. Types of Power of Attorney - general and special 64
6.6.3. Revocation of PoA 64
6.6.4. Limitations of PoA holder 65
6.6.5 PoA executed abroad 66
6.7. Chapter Review Questions 66
Chapter 7: Gifts, Trusts & Family Arrangements in Estate Planning 66
Learning Objectives 67
Topics 67
7.1. Gifts 67
Other Matters Related To Gifts 68
7.1.1. Inheritance Tax 68
7.1.2. Tax on Gifts 69
7.1.2.1. Movable Property – Fair Market Value 69
Determination of FMV for inventory as per the Income Tax Rules 70
7.1.2.2. Immovable Property – Stamp Duty 70
Stamp Duty implications on a Gift 71
7.2. The Indian Trusts Act, 1882 71
7.2.1. Definitions 71
Author/Settlor 71
Trustee 71
Protector 72
Beneficiary 72
Trust Property 72
Trust Deed 72
7.2.2. Types of Trusts 772
7.2.2.1. Testamentary & Non-Testamentary Trusts 72
7.2.2.2. Public, Charitable or Religious Trusts & Private Trusts 73
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 9
Public Trust 73
Private Trust 73
7.2.2.3. Revocable & Irrevocable Trusts 73
Revocable Trust 73
Irrevocable Trust 73
7.2.2.4. Non-Discretionary & Discretionary Trusts 73
Non-Discretionary Trusts 73
Discretionary Trust 733
Other Trusts 74
7.3. Advantages of Private Trusts 74
7.3.1. Planning succession 74
7.3.2. Ring fencing assets 74
7.3.3. Tax planning 74
7.3.4. Protecting persons with special needs 74
7.3.5. Flexibility 75
7.3.6. Transparency in management 75
7.3.7. Strategic objectives 75
7.3.8 Trust as a pass-through entity 75
7.4. Exception – HUF property 76
7.5. Succession planning for small businesses 76
7.6. Business Succession 76
7.7. Offshore Trusts 77
7.8. Family Arrangements 78
7.9. Chapter Review Questions 79
Answers to Chapter Review Questions 790
Chapter 1 800
Chapter 2 81
Chapter 3 82
Chapter 4 82
Chapter 5 84
Chapter 6 85
Chapter 7 85
Disclaimer 87
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 10
Preface
Estate or succession planning is relevant in the complex world we live in. There is a 
growing interest in safeguarding assets and structuring succession. To effectively service 
clients’ needs and your objectives, as financial planners, it is necessary to understand and 
approach estate planning in a structured fashion, and assess the diverse factors involved, 
including estate value and composition, family dynamics, tax benefits and governing law. 
Generally, people are reticent about planning succession. However, with a new found 
awareness of the need to pre-empt and avoid disputes, this view is slowly changing. An 
unplanned succession can lead to lengthy disputes and litigation, which is time consuming, 
costly, and, typically, the estate is tied up, sometimes for decades, until settlement is achieved 
or the proceedings finally adjudicated. 
A financial planner should holistically advise clients on the options available while 
being cognizant of legal framework. An overall understanding of the law surrounding
succession planning is therefore necessary.
The law encompassing succession has evolved considerably due to India’s diverse 
multi-cultural population. As India does not have a unified civil code governing all faiths, there 
was a need for codification of religious laws governing succession. The first statute governing 
succession was the Indian Succession Act, 1865 (repealed) (based on English Law) but it 
excluded all native Indians due to the extent of exceptions contained therein, although the 
Hindu Wills Act, 1870 brought all wills and codicils made by Hindus under its ambit. 
Subsequently, the Probate and Administration Act, 1881 was made applicable to both Hindus 
and Muslims. In view of multiple statutes and personal laws governing religious groups, 
including the Indian Succession Act, 1865, Hindu Wills Act, 1870, Probate and Administration 
Act, 1881, Parsi Intestate Succession Act, 1865, Succession Certificate Act, 1889, etc., the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925 (ISA) was ultimately enacted to bring about uniformity and for 
consolidating the law on succession. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 11
Chapter 1: Introduction to Hindu Law, 
Muslim Law and The Indian Succession 
Act, 1925
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
1-1 Understand the legal structure of estate and succession planning in India.
1-2 Understand the key principles under the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
1-3 Understand the law governing succession of individuals based on religion.
Topics
1.1. Laws of Inheritance
1.2. Hindu Law
1.3. Mohammedan Law/Muslim Law
1.4.1 Indian Succession Act, 1925 – Applicability to Different Religions
1.4.2. Lex Situs & Lex Domicilli
1.4.3. Domicile of Origin
1.4.4. Acquisition of new domicile 
1.4.5. Domicile of Choice and Domicile by Operation of Law 
1.4.6. Consanguinity or Kindred
1.4.6.1. Lineal Consanguinity
1.4.6.2. Collateral Consanguinity
1.4.7. Mode of computing of degree of kindred
1.5. Intestate Succession & Testamentary Succession
1.6. Wills – General Overview
1.7. Succession Certificates & Letters of Administration
1.8. Mutation and process of distribution of Estate
1.9. Chapter Review Questions
1.1. Laws of Inheritance 
The extent of inter and intra religious diversity in India poses a significant challenge in 
implementing a uniform civil code as religious communities follow their own personal laws in 
matters relating to marriage, divorce, succession etc. Personal law is generally defined as a 
law that applies to a certain class or group of people or a particular person, based on religion, 
faith, and culture. The laws of succession in India are complex, multi-layered, diverse, and 
dependant on the personal laws of the deceased, which, in turn, is typically based on religion.
The three laws of succession in India are:
(a). Hindu Succession Act, 1956 which governs the Hindus, Jains, Sikhs and 
Buddhists;
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 12
(b). The Mohammedan Law, which is an uncodified law mainly based the principles 
of Shariat governing Muslims; 
(c). The ISA, which applies to Parsis, Indian Christians and persons married under 
the Special Marriages Act, 1954. 
This Chapter will discuss the above laws.
1.2. Hindu Law 
The Hindu Succession Act, 1965 (HSA), came into force on 17th June, 1956, and 
amended and codified the law relating to intestate succession amongst Hindus. It contains the 
entire law of inheritance applicable to Hindus, Sikhs, Jains and Buddhists. It also provides for 
devolution of property with respect to two main schools of Hindu law, that is, Mitakshara and 
Dayabhaga, as well as classes of heirs, devolution of property on the respective classes, 
disqualification of heirs, and failures. 
With the introduction of the 2005 Amendment Act (as defined hereinbelow in Chapter 
2) the law was radically changed by abolishing the concept of a limited estate of Hindu women, 
and by giving them the absolute right to deal and dispose of their self-acquired property. 
HSA is dealt with in greater detail in Chapter 2.
1.3. Mohammedan Law/Muslim Law
Mohammedan personal law is uncodified and based on the principles of Shariat, being
the commandments of Allah. It is multi-layered, highly nuanced, complex, and applies 
differently to different factions of Muslims. As it has been developing since time immemorial, 
there are numerous sources of law that have modified its development.
Broadly, there are two schools of Mohammedan law, based upon the sects formed 
after the death of the Prophet Mohammed, being:
(a). the Sunni school, which relies on the Sunnah, a record of the teachings of the 
Prophet, which is further subdivided into four schools i.e. Hanafi, Maliki, Shafii, and 
Hanbali. This school follows the personal law known as ‘Sunni law’; and,
(b). the Shia school, which relies on ayatollahs or religious leaders' interpretations 
of the Prophet's teachings, distinct from the Sunni school owing to interpretive 
differences. This school follows the personal law known as ‘Shia law’.
The Shariat lays down a code of obligations, and hence Mohammedan personal law 
encompasses spiritual, religious, legal and social teachings and guidance, as well as the law 
applicable to marriage, dower, divorce, maintenance, Wakfs, testamentary succession, 
inheritance or non-testamentary succession, etc.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 13
The laws of inheritance principally lay down the property that is heritable, the class of 
heirs, shares of heirs, principles to be followed for the devolution of properties and how the 
law will be applicable for different schools of law. 
Mohammedan law is dealt with in greater detail in Chapter 2.
1.1.4.1. Indian Succession Act, 1925 - Applicability to Different 
Religions 
ISA largely governs the succession laws applicable to Parsis and Indian Christians. It 
also governs the testamentary succession of Hindus and applies to persons married under 
the Special Marriages Act, 1954. 
Part V deals with intestate succession. Chapter II, from sections 31 to 35 sets out rules 
for intestates other than Parsis, that is, largely Indian Christians, and governs, amongst other 
things, devolution of property and rights of a widower. Chapter III prescribes special rules for 
Parsis that die intestate under sections 50 to 56 and sets out, amongst other things, general 
principles relating to intestate succession and division of the deceased’s property among 
different heirs. 
These provisions are dealt with in greater detail in Chapter 3. Certain governing 
principles as envisaged by the ISA are as follows:
1.4.2. Lex Situs & Lex Domicilli
Under the ISA, the devolution of the deceased’s estate is based on two established 
English principles: 
Lex Situs or law of the place where a property is situated, governs the immovable 
properties in a deceased’s estate, under section 5(1), which provides that any immovable 
property of a person who has died intestate (that is, not leaving a will or testamentary 
instrument), will be regulated by the laws of India regardless of domicile at death.
Lex Domicilli or law of domicile, under section 5(2), which provides that moveable 
property of a person who has died intestate will be regulated by the law of the country in which 
the deceased was domiciled at death. 
1.4.3. Domicile of Origin
Domicile and residence are an important first step in succession and estate planning. 
Residence of a person is relevant to determine income tax liabilities, and domicile is relevant 
in the context of non-tax considerations such as succession. The concept of residence is 
based on a minimum number of days that the (tax) assesse must be in a country to qualify as 
its resident. Domicile, however is a concept that captures both physical presence and intention 
to stay within territorial limits. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 14
Domicile is defined as the country that a person treats as their permanent home, or 
lives in and has a substantial connection with1
. It is important to understand domicile, in order 
to effectively plan a person’s estate, owing particularly to cross border ramifications. As stated 
above, moveable property is based on domicile at the time of death. Therefore, moveable 
property of persons domiciled in India at death will be subject to Indian law. 
The ISA lays down general principles of domicile. Section 6 provides that a person 
may have only one domicile for succession. The ISA also enlists three types of domicile, being, 
domicile of origin, domicile by choice and domicile by operation of law.
Sections 7 to 9 deal with Domicile of Origin and provides that such domicile of every 
legitimate child is the country where the father was domiciled at the time of birth of the child. 
In the case of an illegitimate child, the domicile of origin is the country where the mother was 
domiciled at the time of birth. Under section 9, the domicile of origin will prevail until a new 
domicile is acquired.
1.4.4. Acquisition of new domicile
Under section 10 a person will be deemed to acquire a new domicile by taking up fixed 
habitation in a country that is not the domicile of origin. The term ‘fixed habitation’ is not 
defined; however, it is generally understood as an intention to acquire a new domicile, which 
is acquired by ‘taking up fixed habitation’ in a country other than the domicile of origin. 
In Central Bank vs. Ram Narain2
, the Supreme Court held that the domicile of origin 
remains constant even if the individual leaves the country with the intention of never returning 
till the person acquires domicile elsewhere. This was further elaborated in Dr. Yogesh 
Bharadwaj vs. State of Uttar Pradesh3
in which the Supreme Court observed that domicile of 
origin cannot be “shaken off easily”. Therefore, unless a certain intention to permanently reside 
elsewhere is proved, the domicile of origin continues.
1.4.5. Domicile of Choice and Domicile by Operation of Law
Generally, it is presumed that a domicile of origin will continue, until it is established 
that a person has given it up by residing elsewhere with the intention of never returning. 
Therefore, there must be a combination of both residence and intention to reside permanently 
or for an unlimited period. In Kedar Pandey vs. Narain Bikram Shah4
, the Supreme Court held 
that the burden of proof to establish that a person has acquired a domicile of choice is on the 
person asserting it. It is important to understand that business connections or ownership of 
assets elsewhere will not exclusively evidence domicile of choice.
While domicile of choice is dealt by section 10, section 11 sets out a special mode of 
acquiring domicile, that is, if a person has been a resident of India for at least year and wants 
1 Oxford Dictionary
2 AIR 1955 SC 36
3 AIR 1991 SC 356
4 AIR 1966 SC 10
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 15
to be domiciled in India, a declaration in writing stating the desire and intent of acquiring such 
domicile must be submitted to the relevant government office.
Sections 14 to 18 deal with domicile by operation of law, and with the object of 
determining the domicile of dependants, such as minors and married women, that is, persons 
whose domicile is dependent on and changes with the domicile of another person in law. 
These provisions cover three categories of dependants; minors, married women and lunatics 
or persons with unsound mind.
Summing up, for ascertaining domicile, the rules above should be considered, along 
with the determination of whether the domicile of origin has been overridden by domicile of 
choice. 
1.4.6. Consanguinity or Kindred
Part IV of the ISA, dealing with consanguinity, does not apply to intestate or 
testamentary succession to the property of a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, Jaina or 
Parsi, who are each governed by personal law.
Consanguinity or kindred relationship, per section 24, means “the connection or 
relation of persons descended from the same or common ancestor”.
Consanguinity is of two types: (i) lineal and (ii) collateral.
1.4.6.1. Lineal consanguinity 
Lineal consanguinity, defined in section 25, is the relationship between two persons 
who are directly ascendant or descendent from the other, such as parent-child, grandparentgrandchild and so forth. When computing lineal consanguinity, every generation, whether 
ascending or descending, constitutes one degree. For example, a parent-child are related to 
each other in the first degree, there being one generation separating them. Grandparentgrandchild are accordingly related in the second degree.
1.4.6.2. Collateral consanguinity
Collateral consanguinity, defined in section 26, is a relationship between persons 
having a common ancestor, but not directly ascending or descending from each other. 
Examples are, siblings ascending from the same parents and cousins who ascend from a 
common grandfather.
While Schedule I contains a table for computing degrees of kindred, that determines 
the manner in which/upon whom property will devolve, section 27 contains the following 
important rules for determining succession:
(a). there is no distinction between those related to the deceased through their 
father or mother i.e. relatives on paternal and maternal sides (of the same degree). 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 16
(b). no distinction is made between half blood and full blood relatives (of the same 
degree).
(c). an unborn child subsequently born alive, if conceived at the time of the death 
of the deceased, is treated as alive / there is no distinction between a child who was 
conceived (but subsequently born alive) at the time of death of the deceased and a 
child who was born during the lifetime of the deceased.
1.4.7. Mode of computing degree of kindred
Part IV and Schedule I computes the degree of kindred or consanguinity separately for 
lineal and collateral consanguinity.
Lineal consanguinity: Under section 25(2), for the purpose of ascertaining in what degree of 
kindred a lineal relative stands to the deceased, every generation, whether ascending or 
descending, constitutes a degree. This has been dealt with above.
Collateral consanguinity: Under section 26(2), for ascertaining in what degree of kindred any 
collateral relative stands to the deceased, it is necessary to reckon upwards from the 
deceased to the common stock and downwards to the collateral relative, a degree being 
allowed for each person, both ascending and descending.
While Schedule I contains a table of consanguinity and computations for determining 
the degrees of kindred, for computation of degrees of collateral relatives, one must begin from 
the person whose relatives are to be reckoned, moving upwards to the common ancestor, or 
downwards to the collateral relative. Thus, the computation is a sum of the degree in which 
the common ancestor stands from such relative in addition to the degree in which the common 
ancestor stands from the deceased.
For example, for ascertaining the degree of kindred of a brother, the degree will be 
computed by reckoning upwards from the deceased to the common ancestor, that is, the 
father, related in the first degree to the deceased, and then to the brother who is related to the 
father in the first degree. Therefore, the brother will stand related to the deceased in the 
second degree.
Illustrations
A and B are brothers having the same father X. A is related to X in the first degree, 
and X is also related to B in the first degree. Therefore, there are two degrees between A and 
B, and A is related to B in the second degree.
C and D are cousins having the same paternal grandfather Z. C is related to Z in the 
second degree, and Z is also related to his grandson D in the second degree. Therefore, there 
are four degrees between C and D, and C is related to D in the fourth degree.
1.5. Intestate Succession & Testamentary Succession
The Oxford dictionary defines an ‘intestate’ as ‘A person who has died without having 
made a will’. Therefore, intestate succession typically connotes the law of inheritance or 
succession applicable upon the death of a person who has not left a will. Other than in the 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 17
case of a Hindu, Mohammedan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain, a deceased intestate’s assets will be 
distributed in accordance with the ISA. For Hindu and Muslim intestates, vesting takes place 
in terms of their personal laws. This will be discussed later.
While the dictionary definition has a wider import, section 30 provides specifically that, 
‘A person is deemed to die intestate in respect of all property of which he has not made a 
testamentary disposition which he is capable of taking effect.’ Hence, a person would be 
deemed to have died intestate when there is no will, or when there are assets that are not 
dealt with in the will of the deceased. The former is known as total intestacy and the latter as 
partial intestacy. 
Accordingly, where assets are excluded from a will, the laws of intestate succession 
will apply to them and they will devolve accordingly. It is, however, important to understand 
that if the will contains a general, or residuary (catch all) bequest of all other assets, it would 
not be a case of partial intestacy, as, effectively, all assets are dealt with.
Intestate succession often leads to disputes, as the distribution of the deceased’s 
estate is governed entirely by the relevant law of inheritance, without any flexibility, unless a 
mutual agreement is arrived between the sharers of the estate.
Moving to testamentary succession, a will is the most common and basic instrument 
articulating and apportioning the devolution of an estate on death. A ‘Will’, under section 2(h), 
is a legal declaration of the intention of a testator with respect to his property which he desires 
to be carried into effect after his death. When making one, the following key factors are 
necessary to keep in mind:
(a). a will should be clear, describe, in detail, the estate, contain unambiguous 
bequests, and also provide for alternate bequests in case primary bequests fail or are 
invalid; 
(b). it should contain a residuary provision to cover any part of the estate that is not 
dealt with specifically;
(c). although not mandatory to name an executor, it is advisable that one is 
appointed. 
(d). an ‘In-Terrorem’ provision is sometimes prudent to incorporate. It provides that 
if a beneficiary challenges the will and/or any of the bequests made therein, such 
person will lose all benefits under the will. While this does not restrict a beneficiary 
from legally challenging a will, it can be an efficient deterrent. 
1.6. Wills – General Overview
A will is always susceptible to challenge and therefore it is necessary that the following 
conditions are met:
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 18
(a). the author of a will should be of sound mind and attained the age of majority. 
(Section 59);
(b). the will should be in writing and executed before two witnesses who should 
each attest the will, all in each other’s presence. (Section 63).
Wills do not require compulsory registration or safe-custody, under the Indian 
Registration Act, 1908 (Registration Act). Even if registered, or deposited in safe-custody, 
there will be no presumption of correctness or validity, that is, a will may be challenged5
.
A will may be declared void if it is:
(a). made by a person who is of unsound mind or a minor (Section 59)
(b). obtained by fraud, coercion, or importunity (Section 61)
(c). a privileged will and the survives beyond a month from making it. (Section 
66(h))
(d). not expressive of any definite intention or is void for uncertainty. (Section 89)
A void bequest does not usually invalidate the will. Therefore, in certain cases a will 
remains valid, while a bequest therein is void. A few examples of void bequests are given 
below:
(a). a gift to an attesting witness of the will (Section 67) 
(b). a bequest not expressive of any definite intention, being void for uncertainty. 
(Section 89)
(c). a bequest to a person not in existence at the time of the testator’s death. 
(Section 112)
(d). a bequest of a life interest (not absolute interest) to an unborn person (Section 
113).
(e). a bequest infringing the rule against perpetuity. (Section 114)
(f). a bequest made with respect to a prior void bequest. (Section 116)
(g). a bequest made upon an impossible condition (Section 126)
(h). a bequest based upon immoral or illegal conditions (Section 127)
1.7. Succession Certificates & Letters of Administration
Succession Certificates 
A succession certificate is a certificate issued by a court of jurisdiction, usually a District 
Court, to legal heirs, and confers authority to inherit debts, securities and other movable 
assets. 
Under section 373, a succession certificate will be granted if the court decides that the 
petitioner has the right, and best title, to the assets in question. A succession certificate will 
5 Section 18 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 19
specify the debts and securities contained in the petition, and may authorize the holder to 
either receive interest/dividends or to negotiate/transfer securities, or both.
Succession Certificates are essential to prove the entitlement of an heir claiming 
inheritance, and, in some states required to transfer title of immovable property along with a 
probate. In some states, however, only a probated will is necessary. 
A succession certificate may be granted, on a petition filed, to a person of sound mind, 
not being a minor and having interest in the property. 
Letters of Administration
Letters of Administration are granted to a person (known as an Administrator) by a 
competent court, or probate registry, in respect of the entire estate of a deceased in the 
following circumstances:
(a). there is no will or testamentary instrument, or
(b). there is a will but an executor has not been appointed, or
(c). the executor named in a will refuses to act, or
(d). the executor named in a will dies.
In determining who should be appointed as administrator, preference is given firstly to 
the widow or widower, followed by persons beneficially entitled to the estate, and failing which 
to petitioning creditor(s). Under section 293, letters of administration cannot be granted before 
fourteen days from the date of the death of the intestate.
On appointment, the administrator is required to collect the estate, pay lawful debts of 
the estate and deal with and distribute the estate in accordance with the law of succession 
that governs the deceased. 
1.8. Mutation and process of distribution of Estate
Any change of title ownership of an immovable property (plot of land, flat, house, bungalow
etc.) from one person to another when the subject property is sold or transferred is referred to 
as Mutation. By mutating a property, the new owner gets the property recorded in his name in 
the concerned government authority’s revenue records.
Mutation is considered a vital document in case of ownership related to land. For example, if 
an agricultural land is acquired by the government and the registry of the land is in the name 
of ‘A’ while mutation is in favor of ‘B’, the government will release the acquisition funds in 
favour of ‘B’, as in the revenue records ‘B’ is recorded as the owner of the land.
Mandatory documents required for mutation are:
• Sale Deed copy
• Application for mutation with court fee stamp affixed on it
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 20
• Indemnity bond on stamp paper of requisite value
• Affidavit on stamp paper of requisite value
• Receipt of up-to-date property tax payment
In case of inheritance or Will the documents required are:
• Death Certificate
• Copy of Will or Succession Certificate
• Indemnity bond on stamp paper of requisite value
• Affidavit on stamp paper of requisite value attested by a Notary
• Receipt of up-to-date property tax payment in case of Power of Attorney
• Copy of Power of Attorney
• Copy of Will
• Receipt for payment registered with a sub-registrar
• Application for mutation with court fee stamp affixed on it
It is worthwhile to periodically check for details regarding mutation as it helps to find if any
illegal transaction has been carried out on the property.
1.9. Chapter Review Questions
1. What are the different types of succession?
2. What are the types of domiciles? 
3. Can a person have more than one domicile?
4. What are the original domiciles of a legitimate child and illegitimate child?
5. What is the principal difference between lineal and collateral consanguinity?
6. When is a person said to have died intestate?
7. Can a part of will be void?
8. How is movable and immovable property of an intestate dealt with?
9. What is a succession certificate? 
10. What is the preferred order considered while appointing an administrator under Letters 
of Administration?
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 21
Chapter 2: Laws of Succession Based on 
Religion
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
2-1 Understand the applicability of succession laws based on religion of a person.
2-2 Understand basic principles of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and Mohammedan Law.
Topics
2.1. The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 
2.1.1. Principle of Propinquity (proximity of relationship)
2.1.2. General rules of Succession (on priority)
2.1.3.1. Order of distribution of shares among Class I and Class II heirs
2.1.3.2. Distribution of shares between heirs in Class I and Class II 
2.1.3.3. Order of succession among ‘agnates’ and ‘cognates’
2.1.3.4. Blood relationships (Full Blood, Half Blood, Uterine Blood)
2.2. Hindu Undivided Family, Ancestral and Self-Acquired property
2.2.1. Hindu Undivided Family
2.2.2. Constituents of a HUF
2.2.3. Types of Property under Uncodified Hindu Law
2.3. Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005
2.4. The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 
2.4.1. Primary Sources of Muslim law in India 
2.4.2. Bequest of property by will (Wasiyatnama)
2.4.3. Requirement of consent in case of bequest of one-third of property
2.4.4. Bequest of property where testator has no heirs
2.4.5. Manner of abatement of legacy in case bequest exceeds one-third without consent of 
heirs.
2.4.6. Bequest to a child in womb is valid
2.4.7. Bequest of property to an heir causing the testator’s death
2.5. Chapter Review Questions
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 22
2.1. The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 
HSA applies to, and governs the intestate succession of:
(a). a person who is Hindu by religion, in any of its developments or forms, a 
follower of Prarthana, Brahmo or Arya Samaj;
(b). a person who is Sikh or Buddhist by religion; and
(c). to any person who is not a Christian, Muslim, Jew, or Parsi by religion. 
It is not retrospective, and does not affect the succession relating to a Hindu who died 
before 17th June, 1956. It also excludes property owned by Hindus who married under the 
Special Marriages Act, 1954. In the above cases, matters of succession would be governed 
by the ISA.
2.1.1. Principle of Propinquity (Proximity of relationship)
Succession under the HSA is based on the Mitakshara school, a legal treatise on 
inheritance. The principle of propinquity, meaning in order of nearness of blood relation, that 
is, nearest degree of blood relation forms the basis of succession. 
The allocation of the parental property was originally allocated on the rule of 
possession by birth which meant that the sons of the family had exclusive right by birth in the 
property of the joint family, while daughters held no such rights. This rule of allocation was 
known as the doctrine of survivorship. 
When a Hindu dies intestate, this principle of propinquity is used to determine 
distribution amongst heirs, where preference of heirs is based upon the proximity of their 
relationship to the deceased. The principle of propinquity signifies the right by which an heir 
may take possession of the estate. 
2.1.3. General rules of Succession (on priority)
General rules governing the rights of heirs in respect of an estate are based on the 
basis of proximity of their relationship with the deceased. Enumerated below are a few general 
rues:
(a). Full-blood relations are preferred over half-blood relations: 
The relationships of heirs are divided in different categories, depending upon the 
closeness of relationship between the two. Section 2(e) defines “full blood”, “half blood” and 
“uterine blood” as follows: 
“(2)(e) "full blood", "half blood" and "uterine blood"—
(i) two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood when they are 
descended from a common ancestor by the same wife, and by half blood when they 
are descended from a common ancestor but by different wives; 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 23
(ii) two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood when they are 
descended from a common ancestress but by different husbands; 
Explanation - In this clause "ancestor" includes the father and "ancestress" the mother.
This is to be read with section 18, which provides that heirs related by full blood are preferred 
to heirs related by half-blood when determining devolution of property.
(b). Right of a child in womb: 
Under section 20, a child in a mother’s womb at the time of the death of the father has 
the right to inherit property as if the child was born before his death. The child’s share will thus 
be reserved till birth. 
(c). Presumption in case of simultaneous death: 
Section 21 lays down an artificial rule of presumption based on age in cases where 
two persons have died making it impossible to know who survived or who died first. In such a 
case, the presumption in law is that the younger survives the elder. 
(d). Mode of succession of two or more heirs:
Section 19 sets out a rule to govern succession in case property devolves upon two or 
more heirs. In such a case, heirs will take the property per capita and not per stirpes, that is, 
each heir will be entitled to their own equal share. 
It is important to note that in a distribution per stirpes (which means “by representation”) 
property is divided according to class of heirs or equally amongst each branch of the family. 
Further, heirs will take the property as tenants-in-common and not joint-tenants, that 
is, the property does not revert to one in case the other dies. Section 19 deals with the legal 
concept of tenants-in-common and joint-tenants. Acquiring and holding property as tenantsin-common means that on death, the deceased’s share will devolve upon the heirs of the 
deceased. In case of a joint-tenancy, the deceased’s share will devolve upon the other joint 
tenants, and not to heirs
2.1.3.1. Order of distribution of shares amongst Class I and Class II heirs
Section 8 provides that when a Hindu male dies intestate, his property will be 
distributed amongst his heirs on the basis of the class of heirs they belong to, as specified by 
the Schedule contained in the HSA. Each class excludes the other, that is, if there are heirs 
in one class, the property will devolve entirely upon them, to the exclusion of the other classes. 
Accordingly:
(a). property will first devolve upon Class I heirs. Class I heirs are known as 
‘preferential heirs’. Class I heirs include sons, daughters and the widow;
(b). if there are no Class I heirs, the property will devolve upon Class II heirs. Class 
II heirs include brother(s) of the deceased and sister(s) of the deceased. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 24
(c). if there are no Class II heirs the property will devolve upon agnates. Agnates 
include a deceased’s son’s son, a deceased’s father’s brother’s widow and a 
deceased’s father’s brother’s daughter; and, 
(d). if there are no agnates, property will devolve upon cognates. Cognates include 
a deceased’s daughter’s children and a deceased’s son’s daughter’s children. 
This hierarchy above stems directly from the principle of propinquity. 
Section 9 specifies the order of succession amongst heirs in the schedule and also 
belonging to each class. It specifies that: (i) Class I heirs will inherit their respective shares 
simultaneously and to the exclusion of all others, (ii) Class II heirs will inherit according to their 
position as specified by the entries of the schedule. Class II is also divided into nine subsections or entries, each containing several groups of heirs. For example, the heirs specified 
in Entry I of Class II will be preferred over those in Entry II. 
2.1.3.2. Distribution of shares between heirs in Class I and Class II 
Although Class I heirs inherit their share of the property simultaneously their shares 
are not equal. Section 10 sets out rules for the distribution of such share amongst Class I 
heirs, which are as follows:
Rule 1- The widow of the deceased (or if there are more than one widow, all widows together) 
take one share.
Rule 2- The surviving sons and daughters and the mother of deceased each take one share.
Rule 3- The heirs of each pre-deceased son or each pre-deceased daughter of the deceased 
take one share jointly.
Rule 4 – This elaborates on Rule 3 and provides that in case of a pre-deceased son’s heirs, 
shares will be taken in equal proportion by the widow(s) and sons and daughters. In case of a 
pre-deceased daughter’s heirs, the shares are to be taken in equal proportion by her sons and 
daughters; her husband being excluded.
As far as Class II heirs, section 11 provides that all heirs mentioned in the same entry 
will receive the same proportion of shares. For example, as both, brother and sister of the 
deceased fall under Entry II of Class II, they will inherit the property in the same proportion.
Sections 8,9,10 and 11 and their rules, must be read with section 19, that is, if two or 
more heirs receive the same property together then, they will take it per capita and as tenantsin-common (referred above). 
2.1.3.3. Order of succession among ‘agnates’ and ‘cognates’
As stated above, in the absence of Class I and Class II heirs, agnates will inherit, and 
in their absence, cognates will inherit. Under section 2(a) a person is an “agnate” of another 
person if the two are related by blood or adoption wholly by males. For example, a deceased’s 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 25
son’s son will be an agnate. Under section 2(c) a person is a “cognate” of another person if 
the two are related by blood or adoption but not wholly through males. For example, a 
deceased’s father’s sister’s son will be a cognate. 
Section 12, provides three rules of preference to determine the order of succession 
amongst agnates and cognates, that is:
(a). Rule 1 - Between heirs who claim to be descendants of a male deceased, the 
heir that is related by a nearer line to the deceased is preferred to the one from a 
remote line. For example, agnates classified as the deceased’s son’s son’s son will be 
preferred over the deceased’s brother’s son’s son.
(b). Rule 2 - When an heir in the same line is nearer to the common ancestor than 
another relation in the same line, the former is preferred to the latter. For example, a 
deceased’s father’s brother’s son will be preferred over his father’s brother’s grandson, 
even though both are in the same line, that is, the line starting from father’s father.
(c). Rule 3 - Neither heir is entitled to be preferred to other under Rule 1 and Rule 
2 and they will take shares in equal ratio.
Section 13 sets out rules to compute the manner in which the degree of closeness of 
the relationship of cognates and agnates are to be decided, which is reproduced below:
“(1). The relationship is to be reckoned from the male deceased to the heir in terms 
of degree of ascent or degree descent, or both, as the case may be.
(2). Degrees of ascent and descent shall be computed inclusive of the male 
deceased.
(3). Every generation constitutes a degree either ascending or descending.”
2.1.3.4. Blood relationships (Full Blood, Half Blood, Uterine Blood)
Another relevant rule of succession is that while deciding the proximity of relationships 
for devolution of a deceased’s shares upon heirs, the relationships of the heirs with the 
deceased are divided in different categories, depending upon the closeness of relationship 
between the two (as referred above).
The provisions in respect of blood relationships as dealt with in 2.1.3 (a) above are to 
be read with section 18, under which heirs related by full blood are preferred to heirs related 
by half-blood when determining devolution of property.
2.2. Hindu Undivided Family, Ancestral and Self-Acquired Property 
2.2.1. Hindu Undivided Family 
It is necessary to briefly touch upon the concept of a hindu undivided family (HUF), a 
unique concept under uncodified Hindu Law. A HUF is a body comprising persons lineally 
descended from a common ancestor and includes wives and unmarried daughters. A HUF 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 26
can be formed only by a family and not by an individual. Common examples of an HUF are a 
husband, wife and their children. An HUF comes into existence on its own when a person gets 
married. A married couple themselves can be considered an HUF. 
An HUF is important while determining succession planning of a Hindu as the income 
earned by members is considered to belong to the whole family and not to a specific individual. 
Under section 2(31) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (IT Act) an HUF is considered a ‘person’ 
and is assessed as a separate legal entity. Income of an HUF is taxed in its hands. 
2.2.2. Constituents of a HUF 
Coparceners
A coparcener is a person who acquires interest by birth, up to three generations from 
the senior most male member of the HUF. A coparcener is considered a member of an HUF. 
However, there is a difference between coparceners and members; coparceners have an 
interest in HUF property, but members do not. A coparcener also has the right to demand 
partition of the HUF. The position and rights of a coparcener takes on significant relevance in 
light of the amendments made to the HSA which are dealt with below.
Karta
The Karta is the senior most member of an HUF and tasked with the responsibility of 
managing the HUF and its property. The eldest coparcener takes on the role of the Karta of 
the HUF. The most significant power vested in a Karta is his legal right to deal and alienate 
any HUF property, if he considers that such alienation is for the benefit of the family. A Karta 
may alienate HUF property for legal necessity, for the benefit of the estate and maintenance 
of the family and for performance of certain indispensable duties.
2.2.3. Types of Property under Uncodified Hindu Law 
Under uncodified Hindu Law the primary types of property holding are ancestral 
property, joint family property and self-acquired property. 
Ancestral Property
Ancestral property is acquired through inheritance from ancestors. It is always shared 
by coparceners equally. This type of property is also known as Coparcenary Property. 
Joint Family Property
Joint family property is acquired by the members of a joint family together and also 
consists of ancestral property, wherein every coparcener has a joint interest in the property. 
Self-acquired Property
Self-acquired property is property that was either originally joint family property and 
has now become separate, or property that is self-acquired by an individual and HUF having 
any interest in such property. A member of an HUF may own separate or self-acquired 
property whilst continuing to be a member of the HUF. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 27
It is important to understand these different types of properties as they are dealt with 
differently under the HSA.
Nature of Ancestral Property & Self-acquired Property 
(a). Devolution based on share in property: Ancestral property and joint family property 
devolve upon the successors of a deceased, by survivorship, subject to the provisions of 
section 6 and section 30, only in respect of the deceased’s share in the property. Self-acquired 
property of a person can be dealt with in total and devolves upon his or her successors through 
succession. Although both can be made subject matter of a testamentary disposition, 
ancestral property and joint family property is limited to the share of the deceased, whereas 
self-acquired Property can be dealt with completely.
(b). Nature of Interest: All coparceners acquire interest in ancestral property by virtue of 
their birth into the family. Self-acquired property is the exclusive property of a person, and the 
HUF and its coparceners do not acquire any right to it.
(c). Alienation by Will: Prior to the HSA, no coparcener could alienate his undivided interest 
in ancestral property by way of will. Self-acquired property could be freely dealt with. However, 
Section 30 now enables a Hindu to dispose of his interest in a coparcenary property by way 
of will. Self-acquired property can be dealt with freely by creation of a will.
(d). Alienation by Gift: Self-acquired property can be freely gifted. A right or undivided 
interest in ancestral property cannot be gifted by a coparcener.
2.3. Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 
The Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 (2005 Amendment) brought about a 
revolutionary change to Hindu family law, amending several provisions, the most notable being 
conferment of rights and liabilities upon Hindu women in respect of property and inheritance. 
The principal amendments are:
(a). Granting of coparcenary rights to Hindu females: Females in a Hindu joint family governed 
by Mitakshara law are equally entitled to a share in ancestral property as their male 
counterparts, and granted the same rights and liabilities. 
(b). Abolition of survivorship: Prior to the 2005 Amendment, the interest of the deceased in 
property of a joint Hindu family would, on death, go to surviving co-owners of such property. 
However, post-amendment, such interest will devolve by testamentary or intestate 
succession.
(c). Allotment of shares in coparcenary property to Hindu females: If a Hindu male (in a joint 
Hindu family governed by Mitakshara law) died after the 2005 Amendment, his daughter will 
be allotted the same share as his son. The share of a pre-deceased son or pre-deceased 
daughter will be allotted to their surviving child/children. The 2005 Amendment does not affect 
the rights of a Hindu male to dispose of his self-acquired property under a will. If a male dies 
intestate, then his property will devolve by intestate succession above.
(d). Abolition of pious obligation: The doctrine of pious obligation existed in uncodified Hindu 
law and imposed an obligation on the son, grandson or great grandson of a deceased to pay 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 28
off all (the legal or moral and illegal or immoral) debts incurred by the deceased. Such 
obligation has been abolished.
(e). Right of a female heir to claim partition: Hindu female heirs can claim partition of a dwelling 
house occupied by a joint family; earlier reserved only to Hindu male heirs.
(f). A remarried widow of a pre-deceased son, pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son or 
brother will inherit property of the intestate.
2.4. The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 (Sharia Act)
Mohammedan Law is personal to Muslims, whether by birth or conversion. Section 2 
of the Sharia Act provides that, “notwithstanding any custom or usage to the contrary, in all 
questions (save question relating to agricultural land) regarding intestate succession, special 
property of female (including personal property), marriage, dissolution of marriage, including 
talaq, lis, zihar, lian, khula and mubarar’at, maintenance, dower, guardianship, gifts, trust and 
trust properties and wakfs (other than charities and religious endowments), Muslim personal 
law (shariat) is to apply to all cases where the parties are Muslim.”
2.4.1. Primary Sources of Muslim Law in India 
There are 4 primary sources of Muslim Law in India, that is, the Quran, the Sunnah of 
Hadis, Ijma and Qiya. 
The Quran 
All Muslim communities believe that the Quran is Al-furquan, meaning the one showing 
the truth as distinguished from falsehood and right from wrong. Out of its 6000 verses, only 
200 deal with legal principles, and of these only 80 deal with the law of personal status, like 
inheritance, marriage and divorce. 
The courts in India, while administering the law, cannot interpret the Quran in a way 
that is against the interpretation of the ancient commentators of established authority. It is the 
most highly regarded primary source of Mohammedan Law.
The Sunna 
In Arabic, Sunnah means “tradition” or “way”. It is to be interpreted as a kind of practice, 
that is, words, actions and teaching, of the Prophet or a precedent set by the prophet. Sunnah 
is understood to be the way of life as deduced from the Prophet’s behaviour. Examples of 
Sunnah include voluntary charity, voluntary prayer and fasting, good table manners etc. 
Ijma
Ijma is the Arabic term referring to consensus or agreement of Islamic scholars on a 
point of Islamic law. When a number of people who are learned in Islamic Law agree on a 
particular question, their consensus is binding on the Muslim community. This source is based 
on communal thinking and the belief that a community or group is less likely to make an error. 
The rules set out by Ijma have varying degrees of binding authority in different schools. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 29
The Ijma is considered to be the third most important source after the Quran and 
Sunnah by Sunni Muslims. There is often disagreement between different sects on the 
interpretation of such consensus, some believing that is the consensus of only the first three 
generations of Muslims whereas other sects believe that it is to be interpreted as the 
consensus of only Islamic scholars and jurists.
Qiyas
With the expansion of the Islamic community and their increased interactions with 
different societies, Muslims encountered new situations which were beyond the scope of both 
the Quran and the Sunnah. In Islamic law, the deduction of legal prescriptions from the Quran 
or Sunnah by analogic reasoning on matters not explicitly covered therein or unsystematic 
opinion is called Qiyas. It constitutes the fourth source of Muslim Law. 
2.4.2. Bequest of property by will (Wasiyatnama)
Property under Muslim law is anything which is capable of being transferred and which 
exist at the time of the testator’s death. The Fatwa-i-Alamgiri defines a will as the “conferment 
of a right of property in a specific thing, or in a profit or a gratuity to take effect on the death of 
the testator”. Under Muslim Law, only one-third of a person’s net estate may be bequeathed 
by will, subject to certain conditions and exceptions prescribed under Shia and Sunni law. 
2.4.3. Requirement of consent in case of bequest of one-third of property
Under Shia law, a testator can only dispose of one-third of his estate by will, either to 
an heir or a complete stranger (non-heir), without the consent of heirs. Bequests in excess of 
one-third, either to an heir or a complete stranger, will not take effect and will be invalid, 
unless the other heirs consent to it. Such consent may be given before or after the testator’s 
death.
Under Sunni law, a testator may dispose up to one-third of his estate only to a stranger, 
without the consent of the other heirs. However, bequest of up to one-third to an heir will not 
be effective without the consent of other heirs, which consent is required to be given after the 
testator's death. Consent, once given cannot be rescinded. Consent need not be expressly 
given; it may also be implied by conduct. If all heirs do not consent, the shares of those 
consenting will be bound, and the legacy in excess will be payable out of their shares. If 
consent is not given by the heirs to a bequest of up to one-third of the estate, the bequest will 
lapse and will form the part of the remaining estate of the testator. In case the bequest 
exceeds one-third of the entire estate of the testator, the bequest will abate and the shares 
will be distributed to the heirs mentioned in the will.
2.4.4. Bequest of property where a testator has no heirs 
If a Muslim has no heirs, there are no rules governing bequest of his estate and the 
same may be bequeathed entirely to a stranger.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 30
2.4.5. Manner of abatement of legacy in case bequest exceeds one-third without 
consent of heirs
If a bequest exceeds one-third of the whole estate, and heirs do not consent, the ratio 
of heirs receiving property under a will is subsidized to maintain the rule of one-third. This is 
called abatement of legacy.
 
Under Sunni law, the process of abatement is done in a rateable manner or 
proportionally, that is, reducing the ratio of the property bequeathed to the heirs to maintain 
the rule of one-third. The property will be reduced in the same ratio as the property was 
bequeathed to such heir in the testator's will.
Under Shia law, the process of abatement is undertaken in a preferential manner, that 
is, shares given to heirs under a will are not reduced but are distributed in chronological order, 
as stated in the will. The first name listed in the will, will receive the full shares bequeathed by 
the testator, and remaining shares will be passed in favour of the second, and then the third 
and so on, till the property reaches the one-third limit.
2.4.6. Bequest to a child in womb is valid
Under Sunni law, bequest to a child in the womb is valid, if the child is born within six 
months of the testator's death. If the child is not born within six months, the bequest will lapse 
and will form a part of the remaining property of the testator which is not bequeathed under a 
will. 
Under Shia law, a bequest to a child in the womb is valid, if it is born in the longest 
period of gestation, that is, ten lunar months (lunar month is basically time between one new 
moon or one full moon and next full one).
2.4.7. Bequest of property to an heir causing the testator's death
Under Sunni law, bequest to an heir causing the testator's death, whether intentionally 
or by accident, is not effective.
Under Shia law, bequest to an heir causing the testator's death, only intentionally, is 
not effective.
2.5. Chapter Review Questions
1. What laws of succession are applicable to persons professing different religions?
2. Which religious groups are governed by the HSA?
3. Does the HSA apply to testamentary succession?
4. What is a HUF?
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 31
5. How is the property of the intestate deceased distributed among full blood, half blood 
and uterine blood according to the HSA?
6. What is the rule of presumption under HSA?
7. How is the property distributed among the classes of the heirs of the deceased?
8. What changes were introduced to the HSA by the Hindu Succession (Amendment) 
Act, 2005?
9. What are the primary sources of Muslim Law in India?
10. What conditions must be followed by the testator while preparing the will under Muslim 
law in India?
11. What happens when property is bequeathed to a child in the womb under Muslim law?
12. Under Muslim law, what happens to a bequest of the person who caused testator’s 
death?
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 32
Chapter 3: Salient Features of the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925 in Testamentary 
and Intestate Succession
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
3-1 Understand common definitions.
3-2 Identify the applicability and salient features of the ISA.
Topics
3.1. Introduction
3.2. Definitions
3.3. Applicability of the Indian Succession Act, 1925
3.4.1. Persons capable of making a Will
3.4.2. Animus testandi 
3.4.3. Lapse of Legacy 
3.4.4. Bequest made to a class of persons 
3.4.5. Rule against perpetuity 
3.4.6. Onerous, Independent and Contingent Bequests 
3.4.7. Specific & Demonstrative Legacy 
3.5.1. General Rules of Intestacy
3.5.2. Rules specific to Parsis dying intestate
3.6. Chapter Review Questions 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 33
3.1. Introduction
Testamentary succession is succession by a testament or will made during one’s 
lifetime, determining the devolution of movable and immovable property after death. 
Testamentary succession in India is governed by the ISA and/or applicable personal law. This 
chapter deals with the salient aspects of testamentary succession, specifically Part VI of the 
ISA pertaining to wills, including wills of (i) Hindus, Jains, Sikhs, Buddhists, subject to section 
57, (ii) Indian Christians, (iii) Parsi and (iv) Jews. In matters of testamentary succession, the 
ISA will override all Hindu customs, traditions, and usages. This Chapter also deals with 
general rules of Intestate Succession as dealt with under the ISA.
3.2. Definitions
Important definitions: 
Will 
As defined in Chapter 1, a ‘Will’, under section 2(h), is a legal declaration of the 
intention of a testator with respect to his property which he desires to be carried into effect 
after his death. Part VI (Testamentary Succession) contains provisions on wills. While the 
words will and testament are generally synonymous, the ISA only uses the term ‘will’. 
Testator 
A testator (not defined) is understood to mean the maker or creator of a will. Under 
section 59, every person who has attained majority (above 18 years where there is a natural 
guardian, and above 21 years in case of an appointed guardian) and is of sound mind, may 
make a will. A female who makes a will is called a testatrix.
Legatee
A legatee (not defined) is understood to mean a person who inherits under a will.
Codicil
A ‘Codicil’, under section 2(b), means an instrument made in relation to a will, which 
explains, alters or adds to its dispositions, and is deemed to form a part of the will.
Executor
An ‘Executor’, under section 2(c), means a person to whom the execution of the will of 
a deceased person is, by the testator's appointment, confided; or simply put, a person 
appointed by a testator to execute the will. 
Administrator
An ‘Administrator’, under section 2(a), appointed by a competent authority to 
administer the estate of the deceased when there is no executor.
Probate
A ‘Probate’, under section 2(f), means a copy of a will certified by a Court with a grant 
of administration to the estate of the testator. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 34
Letters of Administration
Letters of Administration are granted where there is no will, or a will in which an 
executor has not been appointed.
Minor
‘Minor’, under section 2(e), means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen 
years. A minor cannot make a will, under section 59. 
3.3. Applicability of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 
The applicable/governing laws with respect to both testamentary and intestate 
succession for different religious groups in India are as follows: 
Succession for Hindus
The ISA applies to the testamentary succession of Hindus. Intestate succession is 
governed by the HSA. 
Succession for Muslims
The ISA does not apply to testamentary and intestate succession of Muslims. 
Succession for them is based on their uncodified personal law derived from religious sources 
(outlined in Chapter 2).
Succession for Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists
The ISA governs the testamentary succession of Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists. Intestate 
succession for them is governed by the HSA.
Succession for Christians, Parsis and Jews
Both testamentary succession and intestate succession for Christians, Parsis and Jew 
is governed by the ISA. 
As stated above, testamentary succession of Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists, 
Christians, Parsis and Jews is governed by Chapter VI which deals with the following matters:
3.4.1. Persons capable of making a Will 
Section 59 - capacity to make a will, which provides soundness of mind and age of 
majority as prerequisites. Soundness of mind is understood as the capacity to properly 
understand the meaning and consequences of one’s actions, and specifically capacity to 
understand the disposition of property under a will. 
Relevant explanations to section 59 are outlined below:
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 35
(a). Explanation 2 allows the deaf, dumb and blind to make a will if they are able to 
know what they do by it. 
(b). Explanation 3 allows a person who is ordinarily insane to make a will during 
an interval when he is of sound mind. Subsequent insanity does not make a will 
invalid. 
(c). Explanation 4 – contains a prohibition to making a will when one is in a state 
of mind that one does not know what one is doing. This includes intoxication and 
illness
General Principles
A will that appears to be duly signed and attested is presumed to be made by a person 
of sound mind, unless proved otherwise. The general rule relied by Indian Courts is that a 
person propounding a will (offering it for probate) would be called upon to show, by satisfactory 
evidence, that it was signed by the testator, that the testator, at the relevant time, was in a 
sound and disposing state of mind, that the testator understood the nature and effect of the 
dispositions and put his signature to the document of his own free will. 
The onus on the propounder can be taken to be discharged on proof of essential facts 
just indicated.6
If a will is rational on the face of it, and appears to be duly executed, it is 
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to be valid. 
Ordinarily when evidence adduced in support of a will, is satisfactory and sufficient to 
prove the sound and disposing state of the testator's mind and his signature as required by 
law, courts would opine in favour of the propounder.
Illustrations
X has a basic understanding of his surroundings but does not have a competent 
understanding as to the nature of his property, who should succeed him in his property or the 
effect of a will. X cannot make a valid will.
Q is suffering from a serious health condition but is capable of understanding the mode 
of disposing her property and making a rational choice of who should inherit her property. A 
will made by Q is valid. 
From the above a person should (i) understand and recollect the extent of his property, 
and (ii) understand that he is bequeathing his property to one or more persons. 
6 Mahesh Kumar (Dead) By L.Rs. vs. Vinod Kumar and Ors. 2012 (3) ALLMR (SC) 470
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 36
3.4.2. Animus testandi 
Animus means "intention to do something” and testandi “to make a will or testament”. 
Therefore, animus testandi is the intention to make will or testament is and a basic requirement 
of a valid will. For example, a mentally disabled person cannot make a valid will, because 
he/she lacks the intention. A person may produce an instrument in compliance with the legal 
requirements of a valid will, yet it may fail to take effect as valid, because of the absence of 
animus testandi, that is, without any intention that it should affect the disposition of his property 
after his death. When considering the validity of a will, courts look into the fact of whether there 
was animus testandi, that is, whether the testator had the intention to convey his property by 
means of the instrument7
.
3.4.3. Lapse of Legacy
Section 105 provides that if a legatee does not survive the testator, the legacy but will 
lapse and form part of the residue of the testator's property, unless it goes to another person 
under the will. To entitle the representatives of the legatee to receive the legacy, it must be 
proved that he survived the testator. Under section 106, if a legacy is given to two persons 
jointly, and one of them dies before the testator, the other legatee will take the entire legacy. 
Illustrations
The testator bequeaths a property to A. A dies before the testator; the legacy lapses 
and forms part of the residue of the testator’s property. 
A bequest is made to B and his children. B dies before the testator, the legacy to B 
and his children lapses.
A legacy is given to X, and, in case X dies before the testator, to Z. X dies before the 
testator. The legacy goes to Z. 
The testator and the legatee perish in the same car accident. There is no evidence to 
show which died first. The legacy lapses. 
3.4.4. Bequest made to a class of persons
Section 111 deals with survivorship in case of bequest to a described class. It provides, 
“Where a bequest is made simply to a described class of persons, the thing bequeathed shall 
go only to such as be alive at the testator's death. 
Exception.- If property is bequeathed to a class of persons described as standing in a 
particular degree of kindred to a specified individual, but their possession of it is deferred until 
a time later than the death of the testator by reason of a prior bequest or otherwise, the 
property shall at that time go to such of them as are then alive, and to the representatives of 
any of them who have died since the death of the testator.” 
77 Satappa Ors. vs. Shantappa and Ors. MANU/KA/3201/2017
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 37
Illustrations
A bequeaths a garage to “the children of B” without saying when it is to be distributed
among them. B had died previous to the date of the will, leaving three children, X, Y and Z. Z 
died after the date of the will, but before the death of A. X and Y survive A. The legacy will 
belong to X and Y to the exclusion of the representatives of Z. 
 
A bequeaths a house to B for life and after his death equally among the children of C. 
Up to the death of B, C had not had any child. The bequest after the death of B is void. 
3.4.5. Rule against perpetuity
The rule against perpetuity is defined in section 114. It provides that a bequest will not 
be valid if vesting of the thing bequeathed may be delayed beyond the lifetime of one or more 
persons living at the testator’s death and the minority of some person who shall be in existence 
at the expiration of that period and to whom, if he attains full age, the thing bequeathed is to 
belong. 
The rule against perpetuity relates to any property, whatever be its nature, and whether 
it is movable or immovable. This rule against perpetuity is also envisaged under section 14 of 
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (TOPA) and limits the maximum time period beyond which 
property cannot be transferred. The rule against perpetuity does not apply to charitable or 
religious endowments.
Illustrations
A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to B for his life, and after B’s 
death to such of B's sons as shall first attain the age of 25. B dies in the lifetime of the testator, 
leaving one or more sons. In this case the sons of B are persons living at the time of the 
testator’s death, and the time when either of them will attain 25 necessarily falls within his own 
lifetime. The bequest is valid. 
A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to B for his life, with a direction 
that after B’s death it shall be divided amongst such of B’s children as shall attain the age of 
18, but that, if no child of B shall attain that age, the fund shall go to C. Here the time for the 
division of the fund must arrive at the latest at the expiration of 18 years from the death of B, 
a person living at the testator's decease. All the bequests are valid.
3.4.6. Onerous, Independent & Contingent Bequests
Onerous Bequests
Under section 122, when a bequest imposes an obligation, the legatee can take 
nothing unless he accepts it fully. This is known as an onerous bequest. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 38
Illustration
A bequeaths her house to X on the condition that X will pay for the education of her 
surviving children. X refuses to perform this obligation and therefore will not receive the house 
bequeathed to her. 
Independent Bequests
Section 123 provides that where a will contains two separate and independent 
bequests to the same person, the legatee is at liberty to accept one of them and refuse the 
other, although the former may be beneficial and the latter onerous. 
Illustration
J bequeaths the sum of INR 50,000, and also a villa in Goa, to A, with the bequest of 
the villa on the condition to that A will have to reside there. A may accept the bequest of money 
and refuse to accept the bequest of the villa. 
Contingent Bequests
Section 124 deals with a bequest contingent upon a specified uncertain event, where 
no time is mentioned for its occurrence. It provides that, in such a case, the legacy cannot 
take effect, unless such event happens before the period when the fund/property bequeathed 
is payable or distributable. 
Illustrations
A legacy is bequeathed to A, and, in case of his death, to B. If A survives the testator, 
the legacy to B does not take effect. 
 
A legacy is bequeathed to P for life, and, after his death to Q, and, "in case of Q’s death 
without children," to R. The language "in case of Q’s death without children" is to be 
understood as meaning in case Q dies without children during the lifetime of P. 
3.4.7. Specific & Demonstrative Legacy
Specific Legacy
Section 142 describes a specific legacy as a specific part of the testator’s property 
(distinguished from all other parts of his property) bequeathed to a legatee. The three 
essentials of a specific legacy are: (a) the property must form part of the testator’s estate, (b) 
it must be identified and distinguished from the remainder of the estate, and (c) there must be 
an intention to bequeath it to a legatee. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 39
Illustrations
C having several immovable properties at New Delhi and also in several other cities, 
bequeaths to D all the immovable property at New Delhi. 
X owns five horses of different breeds and bequeaths his Arabian racehorse to Y. 
Demonstrative Legacy
Section 150 describes a demonstrative legacy as one where a testator bequeaths to a 
legatee a sum of money or a quantity of a commodity from a particular fund or stock. 
The explanation to section 150 sets out a distinction between a specific legacy and a 
demonstrative legacy, that is: “where specified property is given to the legatee, the legacy is 
specific; where the legacy is directed to be paid out of specified property, it is demonstrative”. 
A demonstrative legacy therefore is specific in terms of what the legatee will receive 
but general in terms of the part of the testator’s estate from which such bequest will be made. 
If the fund out of which it is directed to be paid, fails, the legatee will not be deprived of the 
legacy, but will receive the deficiency from the general assets or estate of the testator. 
Illustrations
A bequeaths to B, INR 5,000 being part of a debt due to him from B. He also bequeaths 
to C INR 10,000 to be paid out of his bank accounts, which are further bequeathed to X. The 
legacy to B is specific; the legacy to C is demonstrative. 
A bequeaths to B monthly maintenance of INR 50,000, payable for 2 years. The 
bequest to B is a demonstrative legacy as it is payable out of A’s estate.
Order of payment when legacy directed to be paid out of fund the subject of Specific 
Legacy
Section 151 provides, “that where a portion of a fund is specifically bequeathed and a 
legacy is directed to be paid out of the same fund, the portion specifically bequeathed shall 
first be paid to the legatee, and the demonstrative legacy shall be paid out of the residue of 
the fund and, so far as the residue shall be deficient, out of the general assets of the testator.” 
Hence, a specific bequest from the fund will first be distributed to the intended legatee 
who is receiving the specific legacy and then the legatee receiving the demonstrative legacy 
will receive his bequest, first from the fund and then from the testator’s general estate. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 40
Illustration
A bequeaths to B INR 1,000 being part of a debt due to him from W. He also bequeaths 
to C INR 1,000 to be paid out of the debt due to him from W. The debt due to A from W is only 
INR 1,500 rupees; of this INR 1,500, INR 1,000 belong to B, and INR 500 is to be paid to C. 
C is also to receive INR 500 from the general assets of the testator.
3.5.1. General Rules of Intestacy 
When dealing with intestacy, the ISA is divided into two parts, (i) Rules in case of 
intestates other than Parsis, covered in Chapter II under sections 31 to 49; and (ii) Special 
rules for Parsis specified under Chapter III vide sections 50 to 56. 
Section 32 states that “The property of an intestate devolves upon the wife or husband, 
or upon those who are of the kindred of the deceased, in the order and according to the rules 
hereinafter contained in this Chapter.” 
The governing rules are as follows:
(a). If the intestate has left a widow and lineal descendants, then one-third goes to 
the widow and balance two-thirds to the lineal descendants8
. 
(b). If the intestate is survived by the widow and kindred, but no lineal descendants, 
then one-half goes to the widow and the balance one-half to the kindred9
. 
(c). If there are no lineal descendants or kindred then, that the property goes 
entirely to the surviving husband or wife10
. 
Further, the ISA lays down the rules of distribution among the widow, lineal 
descendants and the kindred of a deceased. According to section 36, if the intestate has left 
a surviving spouse, then his/her share is to be deducted first and then distributed amongst 
lineal descendants and kindred. The rules of distribution among both lineal descendants and 
kindred are contained in sections 33 to 49 of the ISA and deal with every different situation 
that may arise on the death of an intestate, depending on the descendants that survive or 
predecease the intestate.
3.5.2. Rules specific to Parsis dying Intestate
In respect of testamentary succession, all the sections of the ISA are applicable to 
Parsis. However, in cases of intestate succession, there are specific sections carved out which 
are applicable exclusively to Parsis, that is, section 50 to 56 contained in Chapter III of Part V. 
Normal rules of intestacy such as consanguinity do not apply to Parsis. 
General rules are contained in section 50 and are as follows:
8 Section 33(a) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
9 Section 33 (b) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
10 Section 33(c) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 41
(a). No distinction between a living child and a child in the womb who is subsequently born 
alive;
(b). Lineal descendants of an intestate who have died in the lifetime of the intestate without 
leaving a widow or widower or any lineal descendant shall not be considered for 
intestate succession;
(c). A widow or widower of any relative of an intestate who has remarried during the lifetime 
of an intestate shall not be considered and shall be deemed to not exist at the time of 
the intestate’s death.
Section 51 deals with the division of property between widow/widower, children and 
parents of the deceased. The general rule is that if a widow and heirs are alive at the time of 
the death, property will be divided between the widow and each child in equal shares. Further, 
if there is no widow/widower, the children inherit in equal shares. In a case where the parents 
of the intestate are alive in addition to children and/or widower, the property is divided so that 
each parent receives a share equal to half the share of each child.
Sections 52 to 56 deal with specific situations such as division of share of predeceased 
child of intestate leaving lineal descendants, division where intestate leaves no lineal 
descendants but leaves widow/widower of any lineal descendant, where no relative is entitled 
to succeed, and so forth.
3.6. Chapter Review Questions
1. Who can make a will?
2. Who does the ISA govern?
3. What is a lapsed legacy? 
4. What is the difference between bequest and inheritance?
5. What is the ‘rule against perpetuity’?
6. Explain the difference between a specific and demonstrative legacy with an 
illustration. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 42
Chapter 4: Types of Wills & 
Requirements of a Valid Will
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
4-1 Distinguish between the different types of Wills 
4-2 Understand the basic requirements of a valid Will
Topics
4.1. Introduction
4.2. Classification of Wills 
4.3. Types of Unprivileged Wills 
4.3.1. Contingent Will
4.3.2. Concurrent Will 
4.3.3. Mutual Wills & Joint Wills
4.3.4. Holograph Will
4.3.5. Duplicate Will 
4.4. Requirements of a valid Will
4.5. Duly and validly executed Will 
4.6. Attestation
4.7. Appointment of an Executor 
4.8. Amending a Will
4.9. Chapter Review Questions
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 43
4.1. Introduction
Estate planning is an integral part of financial management. Therefore, it is necessary 
to understand the different types of wills recognised in India to effectively assist clients. This 
Chapter also focuses on the importance and requisites of a valid will, the role of an attesting 
witness, alterations made to, or a revocation of, a will, and the necessary requirements of a 
valid will. 
4.2. Classification of Wills 
Wills are broadly classified into privileged wills (Section 65) and unprivileged wills 
(Section 63). The distinction between the two lies in the procedure of execution.
Privileged Will
A special will made in extraordinary circumstances like war or a dangerous expedition. 
Such will can be made oral or in writing. Section 65 provides that any will made by a soldier 
or an airman or a mariner, who has attained the age of eighteen, when he is in actual service 
and is engaged in actual warfare, would be privileged. Such person can dispose of his property 
by a will as prescribed by the mode, manner and rules as described in section 66. 
Unprivileged Will
Every other person who does not fall into the exception carved out for privileged wills, 
can only make an unprivileged will. Unprivileged wills include joint wills, mutual wills and 
contingent wills. These are dealt with below.
A privileged will must be in writing, contain a signature or mark of the testator in 
presence of two attesting witnesses who must also sign or affix their marks in the presence of 
the testator. 
4.3. Types of Unprivileged Wills
4.3.1. Contingent Will
A contingent will is the grant and bestowment of estate, in whole or part, to a 
beneficiary/legatee, subject to fulfilment of condition or event that must be mentioned in the 
will. It attains validity and operates only if the conditions or contingencies prescribed in the will 
have been satisfied or occurred, failing which the will is void. 
The Kerala High Court, in Sridevi Amma & Ors v Venikitaparasurama Ayyan & Ors11, set out 
the following rules for determining the validity of a contingent will:
(1). Such will depends upon the happening of a specified condition or contingency and 
if it fails, the will is inoperative and void thereafter.
11 AIR 1960 Ker 1
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 44
(2). To be regarded as contingent depends upon the intention of the testator, appearing 
either expressly or by necessary implication from the language of the will as a 
whole.
(3). A will is not made conditional merely by statements which have no reasonable or 
logical relation to the testator’s property.
(4). A statement of circumstances which merely indicate necessity, or reason, or 
inducement to make the will, will not make it contingent. 
(5). Where it is doubtful whether a will is contingent, the circumstances under which 
the will was executed or its language should be considered.”
4.3.2. Concurrent Will
Concurrent wills are two wills written by one person, each providing instructions on 
how certain assets of the testator are to be dealt with. For example, one will may deal with 
immovable property exclusively and the other with movable property. They co-exist with one 
another and together, and are held to be valid in law. 
A testator may consider such option to bring about clarity in respect of the distribution 
of his estate, by dividing certain property or beneficiaries into categories, which are defined by 
separate wills. Concurrent wills sometimes cause problems if the wills are not divided 
specifically and contain contradictory statements that deal with the same property in both wills.
4.3.3. Mutual Wills & Joint Wills
Mutual Will
A mutual will is executed by two persons (both testators) who mutually agree, on 
certain terms and conditions, and confer reciprocal benefits upon each other, making each 
other legatees. The terms and conditions of such will are binding on the surviving testator after 
the death of the other. Common examples include a will between a husband and wife 
distributing their respective estates to each other in case of death.
Joint Will
A joint will is one where two or more persons agree to make a conjoint will to determine 
how their joint estate will devolve upon their beneficiaries. An essential feature of this will is 
that it must stipulate conditions in the case of death of one of the testators. If such a will intends 
to take effect after the death of two or more persons, then it cannot be enforceable during the 
lifetime of the other(s). The surviving testator(s) is/are bound to the terms and provisions of 
the will as they can only be altered or amended with consent by both or all testators. In such 
case, a constructive trust is to be formed which holds assets of the deceased testator, till the 
death of the surviving testator(s). A will may be revocable during the lifetime of the testators, 
but once one dies it becomes irrevocable and binding on the other(s). In Minakshi Ammal vs. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 45
Viswanatha Aiyar12, the Court held that a joint will can validly be made by two persons and 
that it may be made to take effect after the death of both testators. The Court also held that if 
the joint will is not a disposition by each testator of his own property but a disposition of joint 
property after the death of the survivor, the will cannot be proved till the death of the survivor.
4.3.4. Holograph Will
A holograph will is entirely handwritten and also known as a handwritten will. Unlike 
other wills, it need not be attested by two witnesses to be considered valid. A common 
drawback of such will is that it depends on the legibility of the handwriting. In Sanat Kumar 
Das & Ors v Smt Arati Das13, an application in respect of letters of administration for a Will 
handwritten by the deceased was accepted by the Calcutta High Court. 
4.3.5. Duplicate Will
A duplicate will is one where a testator executes two copies of the will. Usually one 
copy is retained by the testator, and the other deposited with another person, which may be 
the executor, a trustee, or even an institution such as a bank. This may be done for safety or 
safekeeping. Although there is more than one copy in existence at the same time, each copy 
is considered a single will. In order for a duplicate will to be considered valid, a testator must 
execute the duplicate copy as was done for the original, in accordance with section 63. 
Further, if the testator destroys the original in his custody, all copies regarded as a duplicate(s) 
are to be considered as revoked.
4.4. Requirements of a valid Will
The essential requirements of a valid will, prescribed by law and in judgements, are 
enumerated below:
(a). In Mathai Samuel v Eapen Eapen14, the Court held that a valid will must be a legal 
declaration of the testator’s intention, the testator’s declaration must be with respect to 
his property, and it must contain the desire of the testator that the said declaration 
should be effectuated after his death. 
(b). A will can be made by any person of sound mind not being a minor (above the age of 
18 years as declared in the Indian Majority Act, 1875). This is also provided in section 
59.
(c). A valid will must have the testator’s mark or signature as required by section 63(a), 
without which it cannot be considered a valid will.
12 (1909) 33 Mad. 406
13 (2010) 1 ICC 648 (Cal) (DB)
14 2012 (8) SLT 620
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 46
(d). Section 63(c) deals with attestation by witnesses, and provides that a will has to be 
attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom should have seen the testator 
signing the will. This was ratified in Gopal Swaroop vs. Krishna Murari Mangal and 
Ors.15
.
(e). It must not be made or obtained by fraud, coercion or importunity. Section 61 provides 
that a will made by fraud, coercion or importunity and eliminates the free will of the 
testator, is void. In Asutosh vs. Umasashi16, it was held that the influence to vitiate an 
act must amount to force and coercion destroying free agency, and ordinarily when 
evidence adduced in support of a will is satisfactory and sufficient to prove sound and 
disposing state of the testator and his signature is as required by law, one may be 
justified in making a finding in favour of the will’s validity. However, in cases where 
executor of the will is surrounded with suspicious circumstances and the propounder 
fails to remove the suspicion as to the execution of the will, probate would be refused.
(f). A will can be made at any time during the lifetime of a person and there is no restriction 
as to number of times a will can be made. However, only the last will made before the 
death of the testator is valid.
(g). A will may be amended at any time. If a testator wishes to amend any part of his/her 
will without changing the entire will, the same can be achieved by a codicil.
4.5. Duly and validly executed Will 
The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (Evidence Act) and the Registration Act confer 
registration of any document evidentiary value in a court of law, especially when the existence 
of such document is challenged. Notwithstanding this, it is not mandatory to register a will as 
provided in section 18(e) of the Registration Act, in which wills are included in the category of 
instruments where registration is optional. In Ishwarao Narain Singh vs. Kamla Devi & Ors.17
, 
the Supreme Court held that the genuineness of a will cannot be challenged on the grounds 
of non-registration.
Although registration may not be mandatory, it has some advantages such as: 
(a). protection of the will as it is kept in the safe custody in the office of the Registrar. 
A person not desirous of registering the will may also deposit the same in safe 
custody with the Registrar so that it may be made available to the executors upon 
the death;
(b). Secrecy of the will is maintained because not anyone can examine the will and its 
contents without express permission in writing by the testator himself; or upon his 
death, to any person applying to obtain certified copies on production of his death 
certificate as prescribed under section 57 of the Registration Act. A will deposited 
with the Registrar will generally secure the same from loss or tampering.
(c). A copy of the certified will can only be granted after the death of the testator, to a 
person who applies to obtain the same and submits the death certificate of the 
testator obtained from the concerned authorities. This benefit is only applicable to 
15 2011 (84) ALR 242
16 AIR 1984 Cal 233
17 AIR 1954 SC 280
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 47
persons who apply for certified copies, and not relatives of the deceased whose 
intentions are malafide.
Section 40 of the Registration Act provides that a testator (during his lifetime) and a 
person claiming as an executor or otherwise after the death of a testator, is entitled to present 
a will for registration. Registration may also be undertaken after the death of the testator by 
the executor or any person claiming as executor or otherwise under a will, by presenting it to 
the Registrar for registration. There is no time bar on registration, and it may be presented for 
registration at any time, as prescribed by section 27 of the Registration Act.
Section 43 of the Registration Act contains the procedure to be followed post 
registration. After presenting a will for registration, the Registrar must be satisfied that the 
person presenting it for deposit is the testator, or a duly authorised representative, or agent, 
of the testator. The Registrar will take the will into his custody and place it inside a fire-proof 
box. If the testator wishes to withdraw a deposited will, an application may be made under 
section 44 of the Registration Act, either personally or by duly authorised agent. If the Registrar 
is satisfied that the applicant is actually the testator or his agent, he will deliver it accordingly. 
Section 45 of the Registration Act provides that on the death of a testator who has 
deposited or registered a will, an application may be made to the Registrar who holds the will 
in his deposit to open the same. If the Registrar is satisfied that the testator is dead, he, in the 
applicant's presence, will open the box containing the will, and, at the applicant's expense, 
cause the contents thereof to be copied into his ‘Book No. 3’ for record purposes. When such 
copy has been made, the Registrar will re-deposit the original will. 
4.6. Attestation 
The word “attest” means to bear witness to a fact. Section 63(c) mandates that:
(a). a will must be attested by two or more witnesses,
(b). attestation must be in the presence of the testator,
(c). the witnesses must have to see the testator sign or affix his mark to the will or have 
received personal acknowledgement from the testator that he himself has signed the 
will.
(d). it is not necessary that both witnesses be present at the same time or attest 
simultaneously, but the requirement is that each of the attesting witness must have 
seen the testator sign or affix his mark to the will or has received from the testator a 
personal acknowledgement of his signature or mark upon the will. Each of the attesting 
witness is required to sign the will in the presence of the testator.18
An attesting witness is considered to be one who signs the document in the presence 
of executant/testator after seeing the execution of the document or after receiving personal 
acknowledgment of the testator with regard to the execution of the document19. It is essential 
that the attesting witness puts his signature animo attestandi, that is, for the purpose of 
18 Punni vs. Sumer Chand and Ors. AIR 1995 HP 74
19 Beni Chand (Since Dead) Now by L.R. v Kamla Kunwar and Ors. AIR 1977 SC 63
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 48
attesting that he has seen the testator sign or has received from him a personal 
acknowledgment of his signature (as dealt with in Chapter 3). 
These requirements are to provide an added level of proof when determining the 
validity of a will. Often, attesting witnesses serve the purpose of being able to help authenticate 
the valid execution of a will. A reading of section 63(c) with sections 6820 and 6921 of the 
Evidence Act establishes that a person propounding the validity of a will has to prove that it 
was duly and validly executed, and that should be done by not merely establishing that 
signature on the will was that of the testator but also the attestations were made in the manner 
as contemplated in section 63(c). Section 68 of the Evidence Act does not make it mandatory 
to examine both the attesting witnesses. However, it follows that if one attesting witness 
proves that the testator had acknowledged his signature to him then it is not necessary for the 
other attesting witness to acknowledge. Therefore, mere signatures of witnesses towards the 
end of an instrument or somewhere on an instrument are sufficient to show without explanation 
that the witnesses put their signatures by way of saying that they had seen the document 
being executed and had received an acknowledgement. It is not necessary for them to state 
that they put their signatures in the presence of the testator.22
4.7. Appointment of an Executor 
An executor derives his authority from the will and is appointed by a testator to fulfil his 
last wishes as prescribed by his will and ensure that his estate is dealt with as per his will. A 
testator should ideally appoint a person that he believes will be able to efficiently execute his 
directions, as per the provisions of his will. In order to be considered a capable executor, the 
only requirements are those of majority and being of sound mind. Even a minor can be 
appointed as executor. However probate of the will can be granted only when he/she attains 
the age of majority under section 223.23
A testator is not bound to appoint only a single executor and may appoint more. As 
stated above if a testator does not appoint an executor, a petition for Letters of Administration 
would have to be filed and on grant thereof the will administered in accordance with its terms. 
For the convenient administration of an estate, section 224 permits a person to appoint 
different executors for one will, and provides that probate for separate wills may be granted to 
all executors simultaneously. In such case the estate will remain as one, though its 
administration will vest in separate executors. When a testator appoints several executors, the 
normal inference should be that he expects all of them to act together, the opinion of the 
testator implicit in the appointment being that he expects that his will be fully and properly 
executed when all executors appointed by him act together. 
20 Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872: Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested: If a 
document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has 
been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there is an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process 
of the Court and capable of giving evidence.
21 Section 69 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872: Proof where no attesting witness found: If no such attesting witness 
can be found, or if the document purports to have been executed in the United Kingdom, it must be proved that the 
attestation of one attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the signature of the person executing the 
document is in the handwriting of that person.
22 Dulhin Ful Kueri and Ors. vs. Moti Jharo Kuer AIR 1972 Pat 214
23 Section 223 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925: Persons to whom probate cannot be granted – Probate cannot 
be granted to any person who is a minor or is of unsound mind nor to any association of individuals unless it is a 
company which satisfies the condition prescribed by the rules made by the State Government.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 49
A legatee under a will can be an executor under section 141. If a legacy or bequest is 
given to an executor, in compensation of his service as such executor, the same should be 
mentioned in the will. If an executor is a professional, then a provision for his remuneration 
may be inserted. 
The most important function of an executor is set out in section 222, which provides 
that probate may be granted only to an executor appointed under the will. However, if an 
executor renounces or fails to accept executorship within a reasonable time, Letters of 
Administration would have to be filed. An executor may renounce his executorship either orally 
in the presence of judge or in writing signed by him. After renouncement is made, the executor 
is precluded to apply for probate. An executor is considered a confidante of choice of the 
testator and therefore renunciation is irrevocable and irreversible. 
An executor is required meet all obligations and outstanding debts, if any, of the 
deceased and transfer of assets to the beneficiaries or legatees. The powers of an executor 
are contained in sections 305 to 315, which include disposal of property of the deceased, 
general powers of administration, directly or indirectly purchasing any part of the property of 
the deceased, etc. 
The duties of an executor are enumerated in sections 316 to 331 and include the duty 
to provide funds for the deceased’s funeral ceremonies and expenses, allocating costs 
incurred in judicial proceedings necessary for administrating the estate, paying wages for 
services rendered to the deceased, etc. The powers and duties of an executor have been 
dealt with extensively in Chapter 5.
4.8. Amending a Will
It is always advisable that a testator makes his will irrevocable in the strongest and 
most express terms. However, the testator is not bound by it, and is always entitled to alter 
and/or revoke the same at any time under section 62.
For modifying, altering or amending a will, there are three options available, that is, (i) 
overwrite the original will along with obtaining new signatures of the attesting witnesses, (ii) 
preparing a codicil, or (iii) preparing and executing a new will. While there is no restriction on 
overwriting an original will, it is preferable that a codicil or new will in made and executed to 
avoid confusion, ambiguity or uncertainty. 
Codicils
A codicil is an instrument specifically made in relation to an executed will, that explains, 
alters or adds to its dispositions, and is deemed to form part of the will24
. A codicil may be 
endorsed upon the original will itself, or be a separate document. It is considered an extension 
or addendum of a will and the procedure for execution is similar to the execution of a will. 
Executing a codicil does not bar a testator from further amending his will.
A codicil should ideally refer the specific provisions of the will that are sought to be 
added, removed or altered. In Bhagat Ram v Suresh25 the court held that the same rules of 
execution that apply to a will are applicable to codicils, and that the evidence adduced in proof 
24 Section 2(b) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
25 AIR 2004 SC 436
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 50
of execution of a codicil must satisfy the same requirements so as to apply to prove the 
execution of a will26
. 
As discussed above, registration of a will is optional and the same applies to a codicil. 
However, in practice, if the will is registered, the codicil should be registered. The rationale 
behind registration of both the will and its codicil is to imbibe authenticity of the codicil and 
mitigate against litigation challenging the genuineness of the unregistered codicil.
New Will
In order to carry out structural changes to a will, or when a will requires an overall 
change or the circumstances warrant changing substantial dispositions or bequests, it is 
preferable to execute a new will. This also may apply to a case where several codicils have 
been made, which may lead to an operational nightmare for the executor and/or improper 
distribution of the estate and/or several unhappy beneficiaries/legatees. 
A new (subsequent) will be deemed to revoke the previous will or codicils and is to be 
considered as the last will and testament. There are no restrictions as to the number of times 
the testator may make a will. However, only the last (validly made) will would operate and be 
enforceable. Absence of a recital or confirmation in a new will expressly stating that all earlier 
wills have been revoked has no relevance once the execution of the new will is duly proved. 
In Lachho Bibi vs. Gopi Narain27, the court placed the initial onus of proof on the propounder 
of the will and held that: “The first rule is that the onus probandi lies in every case is upon the 
party propounding a Will, and he must satisfy the conscience of the Court that the instrument 
so propounded is the last Will and testament of a capable testator.”
4.9. Chapter Review Questions
1. What is a will?
2. What are the different types of wills?
3. What are the essentials of a valid will?
4. Is it mandatory to register a will?
5. What is the objective of a codicil?
6. How can a will be altered or amended?
26 Bhagat Ram and Ors. vs. Suresh and Ors. AIR 2004 SC 436
27 Lachho Bibi vs. Gopi Narain and Ors. (1901) ILR 23 All 472
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 51
Chapter 5: Administration of an Estate 
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
5-1 Understand the role and powers vested in an executor. 
5-2 Understand the importance and general procedure for obtaining a probate.
Topics
5.1. The Executor – Legal representative in fiduciary capacity
5.2. Powers of an Executor or Administrator 
5.3. Duties, Role and Responsibilities of Executor and Administrators under the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925
5.3.1. Aggregate inventory of estate and assessed value
5.3.2.1. Probate – Definition
5.3.2.2. Importance and Applicability of a Probate
5.3.2.3. Obtaining a Probate
5.3.3. Establish solvency of the estate, pay expenses, pay off debt on priority
5.3.4. Ancillary Duties & Responsibilities of an Executor or Administrator
5.4. Chapter Review Questions
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 52
5.1. The Executor – Legal representative in a fiduciary capacity
As dealt with earlier, an executor is a person selected by the testator to execute his 
last will and testament. An executor is the legal representative of a testator, acts in a fiduciary 
capacity and holds the assets of the testator after his death, with the authority and duty to 
make decisions per the will. A general example of a fiduciary relationship is one between a 
parent and a minor child, where the parent is responsible for minor’s money or property. It is, 
therefore, the responsibility of an executor to meet all obligations of outstanding debts, if any, 
of the deceased and give consent for transfer of assets to the beneficiaries or legatees under 
the will.
Administrators and executors are an important part of the succession chain especially 
in light of the powers vested in them. Sections 305 to 315 of Chapter VI enumerates the 
powers of executors and administrators, and sections 316 to 331 of Chapter VII set out their 
duties and obligations.
5.2. Powers of an Executor or Administrator 
(a). An Executor has been granted the same powers as the deceased, not only to sue any 
party for all causes of action that survive the deceased but also to recover debts 
owed.28
(b). Section 306 provides that all demands and rights to prosecute or defend any action or 
special proceeding in favour or against a testator at the time of death, survive to and 
against his executors and/or administrators, subject to certain exceptions;
(c). Section 211 confers upon an executor or administrator complete legal right over the 
assets of a testator who are his legal representative for all purposes, and, in whom, on 
death of the testator, all the property vests. Section 307(1) supplements section 211 
and grants an executor or administrator power to dispose of and deal with the property 
of the deceased, vested in him, either wholly or in part, in such manner as he may think 
fit. However, there are certain caveats or exceptions to this power contained in section 
307(2) which lays down the following restrictions in cases where the deceased is 
Hindu, Muslim, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain or an exempted person:
(i). the power of an executor is subject to and is limited by any restriction contained 
in the will. However, if probate has been granted which states in an order in 
writing that despite the restriction, the executor may dispose the property, then 
such restriction will fall away.
(ii). An administrator may not, without the previous permission of the court by 
which letters of administration were granted -
(a) mortgage, charge or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise any 
immoveable property for the time being vested in him under section 211; or 
(b) lease any property for a term exceeding five years. 
28 Section 305 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 53
If an executor or administrator deals with property in a manner that is in contravention 
of the restrictions imposed in section 307, the disposal is voidable at the instance of 
any other person interested in the property.
(d). An executor or administrator is granted general powers of administration under section 
308 and is allowed to incur expenditure from the deceased’s estate on any acts which 
may be necessary for proper care and management of any property belonging to the 
estate. An executor may also make reasonable improvements to the property, with the
sanction of the court.
(e). In order to ensure that an executor or administrator maintains his fiduciary relationship 
with the deceased, section 310 expressly bars purchase of any part of the property of 
the deceased, either directly or indirectly, by the executor or administrator. In such a 
case, the purchase by and sale to an executor or administrator is voidable at the 
instance of any other person interested in the property.
(f). Section 311 gives the same powers, severally, to all executors or administrators in 
cases where several have been appointed by a deceased. For example, any one of 
the several executors has power to release any debt due, or to sell the property of the 
deceased whether movable or immovable. If any one executor or administrator dies, 
the powers vest in the surviving executors, in the absence of any contrary direction 
that may be contained to deal specifically in the will.29
(g). Section 314 gives the same powers to a minor appointed as an administrator as if 
he/she was appointed as an administrator who has attained the age of majority. 
Section 315 gives a married woman to whom a probate or letters of administration has 
been granted, the same powers as an ordinary executor or administrator.
5.3. Duties, Role and Responsibilities of Executors and Administrators under the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925
A few of the primary duties of an executor and administrator are set out below:
5.3.1. Aggregate inventory of estate and assessed value
An executor and administrator is tasked with the duty of taking inventory and account 
of the estate. Section 317 lays down a period of six months after a grant of probate or letters 
of administration, to provide inventory of the estate containing a true and full estimate of 
property in possession, credits due and debts owed to the deceased. It also provides a oneyear period after the grant of probate or letters of administration, to furnish accounts to the 
court of the estate showing those assets which have come into the hands of the executor or 
administrator and the manner in which they were applied for or disposed of. The inventory to 
29 Section 312 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 54
be provided under section 317 must be inclusive of all property, in any state throughout India 
and all such property must be stated separately state-wise.30
If an executor or administrator on being required by the court to exhibit an inventory or 
account under this section, intentionally fails to comply with the requisition, he would be 
deemed to have committed an offence under section 176 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) 
and the intentional provision of a false inventory or account would be deemed to be an offence 
under section 193 of the IPC. In Shernaz Faroukh Lawyer vs. Manek Daru Sukhadwala31
, the
court referred to Bai Panbai (supra) while dealing with the provisions of section 317, and held 
that an executor or administrator may be compelled to exhibit an inventory and render an 
account of his administration of the personal estate of the testator, and if accounts are 
intentionally false, the executor or administrator makes himself liable to punishment and the 
interested parties can file an action against the executor or administrator for questioning the 
correctness of the accounts32
. 
5.3.2.1. Probate – Definition 
A probate is defined under section 2(f) as the “copy of a will certified under the seal of 
a Court of competent jurisdiction with a grant of administration to the estate of the testator”. 
5.3.2.2. Importance and Applicability of a Probate 
A probate once granted is considered to legalise the will and acts as formal permission 
to the executor to transfer the properties to whom they are bequeathed. A harmonious reading 
of sections 213(1) and 57(1) reflects that a probate is mandatorily required for a will made by 
a Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, or Jaina, residing within the limits of West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, 
Assam, Madras, or Mumbai, or if property is situated therein. The provisions relating to probate 
do not apply to Muslims.
When a probate is applied for, and the will proved to be genuine, the executor is 
provided with a certificate proving that it is genuine. A probate is relevant for various reasons 
including for proving the title to an asset in the hands of a beneficiary or legatee. 
5.3.2.3. Obtaining a Probate 
The procedure to obtain probate is to be handled with great caution by a qualified 
Advocate. A probate will be granted by a competent court of law having jurisdiction, and 
requires the Advocate to deal with the court and its authorities and officers. 
Different states have different procedures to applying for and obtaining probate. Such 
procedure is usually set out in Court rules and the procedure of a testamentary suit is laid out 
30 Section 318 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
31 MANU/MH/0012/2017
32 Shernaz Faroukh Lawyer and Ors. vs. Manek Daru Sukhadwala MANU/MH/0012/2017
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 55
by the Civil Procedure Code, 1908. For example, in the city of Mumbai, the procedure for 
obtaining probate is set out in the Bombay High Court Rules. 
Typically, a petition for probate must contain a schedule of properties and credits and 
a schedule of debts of the deceased, and is accompanied by documents such as the 
executor’s oath, affidavits of consent of legal heirs, and an affidavit of at least one attesting 
witness (if available). The value of assets of deceased are mentioned and annexed to the 
petition. The value of properties movable and immovable is distinguished separately to 
ascertain the net value in Indian Rupees (INR).
The court must be satisfied that the will propounded is the final will and testament and 
there is no other. The above affidavit of the attesting witness is submitted as evidentiary 
documentation and a notice is published and served so as to invite claims by creditors and 
heirs. The Court will also verify that the executor is the person that is authorised under the will 
and not any other person. 
5.3.3. Establish solvency of the estate, pay expenses, pay off debt on priority
After grant of a probate or letters of administration the executor’s or administrator’s 
role, after taking inventory and assessing the value of the deceased’s estate, is to follow the 
rules set out in the ISA whilst distributing the estate. Sections 321 to 325 lay down an order in 
which the estate of the deceased is to be apportioned, in which expenses take priority over 
debts. These are, firstly, expenses incurred on funeral ceremonies, death-bed charges 
including medical attendance and stay for one month preceding death, that are payable33
. 
Secondly, expenses of obtaining probate and costs that may be incurred in respect of judicial 
proceedings necessary to administer estate, are to be paid34. Thirdly, wages due to any 
labourer, artisan or domestic servant, for services rendered within three months of death, are 
to be paid. And lastly, other debts according to their respective priorities35. Debts are to be 
paid before payment of legacies36
.
The executor may thereafter move a petition for permission to distribute what is left of 
the decedent's assets to the beneficiaries named in the will. This usually requires the court's 
permission, which is typically only granted after the executor has submitted a complete 
accounting of every financial transaction they have engaged in throughout the probate 
process. Save as aforesaid, no creditor shall have a right of priority over another; but the 
executor or administrator shall pay all such debts as he knows of, including his own, equally 
and in proportion as far as the assets of the deceased will extend.
33 Section 321 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
34 Section 322 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
35 Section 323 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
36 Section 325 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 56
5.3.4. Ancillary Duties & Responsibilities of an Executor or Administrator
(a). Honour specific legacies and proportionate general legacies in the manner prescribed 
by the ISA.
(b). Provide funds for the performance of funeral ceremonies of the deceased, provided 
that there is enough estate left for such purpose37
.
(c). Collect the property of the deceased and the debts that were due to him at the time he 
was living, with reasonable and due diligence.38
(d). Preparing and filing tax returns and paying taxes out of the estate. This may require 
the executor to liquidate assets. 
5.4. Chapter Review Questions
1. Who is an executor?
2. Who can be an administrator?
3. What is the difference between an administrator and an executor?
4. Enumerate the powers and duties of an executor.
5. What is probate? Who can grant probate? 
6. Is a probate compulsory?
37 Section 316 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
38 Section 319 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 57
Chapter 6: Tenancy-in-Common and 
Joint Tenancy, Transmission & 
Nomination
Learning Objectives 
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
6-1 Understand joint tenancy and tenancy-in-common in relation to holding of, and 
succession to, immovable property.
6-2 Understand the effect of joint holding, and nomination, in relation to the management 
and transmission of securities and investments.
6-3Understand the effect of nominations made in relation to holdings in a co-operative 
society ownership structure.
Topics 
6.1. Tenancy-in-Common and Joint Tenancy
6.2. Contracts – Holdings on any/either or survivor basis in bank accounts, mutual funds and 
securities 
6.2.1. Bank Accounts
6.2.2. Mutual Funds
6.2.3. Securities 
6.3. Nomination in Life Insurance Policies
6.4. Nomination in Housing Societies
6.5. Married Women’s Property Act and Estate Planning
6.6. Other Tools for Estate Planning – Power of Attorney
6.6.1. Powers of Attorney, its use and purpose
6.6.2. Types of Power of Attorney - general and special
6.6.3. Revocation of PoA
6.6.4. Limitations of PoA holder
6.6.5. PoA executed abroad
6.7. Chapter Review Questions
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 58
6.1. Tenants-in-Common and Joint Tenancy
Co-ownership is when two or more persons hold joint title to an immovable property. 
A co-owner has an inherent entitlement to possession, the right to use and enjoy and the right 
to dispose of such interest. Section 44 of TOPA39, being the governing federal law in respect 
of transfers of immovable property, applies to co-owners transfers. When a share in property 
is transferred by one co-owner, the transferee will, unless otherwise agreed, acquire the same 
right as held by the transferor, including right to joint possession or enjoyment of the property 
and right to demand partition, subject to one exception therein, being the transferee of a share 
of a dwelling house belonging to an undivided family, who not a member of the family, in which 
case such transferee is not entitled to joint possession or other common or part enjoyment of 
such dwelling house. 
However, the manner in which co-owners jointly own a property, and the passing of 
such shares, by succession or inheritance, is determined by whether they hold the property 
as tenants-in-common or as joint tenants.
Tenancy in common 
When two or more persons jointly own a property as 'tenants-in-common' each coowner: (i) has a distinct interest in the property, (ii) may possess and enjoy the property, unless 
otherwise agreed, and (iii) may freely transfer his interest in the property. Further, on the death 
of a co-owner, his interest in the property will devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, 
as the case may be, to his/her heir(s) or beneficiary(ies).
Joint-tenancy 
Essentially, joint tenants may jointly use and enjoy a property, unless otherwise 
agreed. However, the joint tenant is deemed to have an unspecified share, and the joint 
tenants hold a single unified interest in the property. Such interest cannot be bequeathed, and 
on death, the interest of the deceased co-owner will pass, by survivorship, to the surviving coowner. A joint tenant cannot bequeath his share in the property by will, and it will not pass by 
intestate succession to his heirs. A joint tenancy may be severed by a subsequent mutual 
agreement between the co-owners, whereby the co-owners agree to hold the same in 
specified shares as tenants-in-common.
The following requirements need to be fulfilled for creation of a joint tenancy:
(a). specific language in an instrument reflecting the intent to create a joint tenancy. 
Accordingly, if not specified in an instrument of transfer, or will, or agreement, as to how coowners hold, or will hold, a property, that is, as joint tenants or as tenants in common, the 
position will be that they hold, or will hold, as tenants-in-common.
(b). the interest of joint tenants must vest at the same time. 
39 Section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882: Transfer by one co-owner- where one of two or more co-owners 
of immovable property legally competent in that behalf transfers his share of such property or any interest therein, 
the transferee acquires as to such shares or interest, and so far as is necessary to give, effect to the transfer, the 
transferor’s right to joint possession or other common or part enjoyment of the property, and to enforce a partition 
of the same, but subject to the conditions and liabilities affecting at the date of the transfer, the share or interest so 
transferred. Where the transferee of a share of a dwelling house belonging to an undivided family is not a member 
of the family, nothing in this section shall be deemed to entitle him to joint possession or other common or part 
enjoyment of the house.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 59
(c). joint tenants must have undivided interests in the whole property and not separated or 
divided interests. 
(d). joint tenants must derive their interest by the same instrument. 
(e). each joint tenant must have estates of the same type and same duration. 
A joint tenancy may be created by will or by agreement. In the case of death of a joint 
tenant, his interest will devolve by survivorship, that is, devolves on the surviving joint tenants 
and not the deceased joint tenant’s heirs. 
A clear distinction between the concept of joint tenancy and tenants in common was 
dealt with by the Orissa High Court in Shridhar Ghose v Harimohan Sahu40 where the 
distinction was drawn, on the basis of the mode of creation of the interest in the property, that 
is, whether there is severance of shares amongst the co-owners, and devolution of interest of 
a deceased co-owner.
The terms ‘tenancy-in-common’ and ‘joint tenancy’ are also been dealt with in Chapter 2. 
6.2. Contracts- Holding on any/either or survivor basis in bank accounts, mutual 
funds and securities
6.2.1. Bank Accounts
While an individual/single bank account is prevalent in India, joint accounts may be 
preferred in certain cases, that is when two or more persons hold the account jointly. A joint 
account may have any of the following modes of operation: 
Either or Survivor
An account where there are two account holders, each of whom may operate it. The 
first holder is deemed to be the primary account holder. Should one joint holder die, the other 
(as survivor) will become the sole holder and may continue to operate the account. After 
demise of both holders, a nominee, if any, is entitled to claim the funds in the account, and the 
account will be closed.
Anyone or Survivor
This is akin to the ‘either or survivor’ account holding, but the account will have more 
than two joint holders, any of whom can operate. In such a case, death of a joint holder will 
not affect the account and the surviving joint holders will continue the account. If they close 
the account, the amount credited would be distributed amongst them. An example of this 
account would be a person who opens an account with his/her all family members. A 
nomination can also be made in respect of this account, which contemplates who the funds 
credited will go to post the death of all joint holders.
40 AIR 1964 Ori 141
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 60
Former or Survivor
Only the primary account holder may operate an account while he/she is alive. The 
second/joint holder may operate only after the death of the primary holder. 
Latter or Survivor
Converse of the previous account, where only the secondary account holder may 
operate an account while he/she is alive. The primary holder would be entitled to operate the 
account only after the death of the secondary holder. 
Jointly Held Account 
The account will be operated by both or all holders together. In other words, consent, 
presence, and signature of all holders is required for operations. If any joint holder dies, the 
account will be non-operational and closed. 
Jointly or Survivor
Similar to the ‘Jointly Held Account’ mode, where both or all holders will operate jointly; 
the difference being that after the death of a holder, the joint account will not close. In such 
case surviving account holder(s) may continue the account, or receive the balance and close 
it, at their option.
Minor’s Account 
More than being a joint account, it is statutorily required in case of a minor holding an 
account that an adult or guardian is joint holder and operate the same during the minority of 
the child.
Comparative Table of modes of Operation
Joint Accounts
Sr. Nature Number of 
Holders
Operation Beneficiary(ies) on 
Death 
1. Either or Survivor Two Both Survivor
2. Anyone or Survivor More than Two All Survivors
3. Former or Survivor Two First Holder Second holder
4. Latter or Survivor Two Second Holder First Holder
6. Jointly Held Account Two or more All together Survivor(s)
7. Jointly or Survivor Two or more All together Survivor(s)
8. Minor Account Two or more Adult(s) or 
Guardian(s)
Survivor(s) 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 61
6.2.2. Mutual Funds
Mutual fund units may be held solely, or jointly, with a maximum of three holders. The 
mode of operation may be either or survivor, any or survivor, or jointly. Minors cannot be joint 
holders of units.
All communications and payments (dividends, redemptions, etc.) are made to the first 
holder. If units are held in dematerialized form (that is, in a Demat account), the rules of the 
depository will apply to operations.
Either or survivor operations entitle either holder to effect transactions. In case of ‘any 
or survivor’ operations, any unit holder effect a transaction. In a joint holding, all holders must 
join in effecting a transaction. 
Irrespective of the mode of holding, a request for a nomination must be made by all 
joint holders. The right of joint holder(s) is superior to a nominee, and a nominee will be entitled 
to the units only on the death of the holder, or if there are more than one, then on the death of 
all holders. 
In a joint holding, units will pass, by ‘transmission’, to the surviving joint holder(s), if 
one of the joint holders dies. The term ‘transmission’ is the process by which units of a 
deceased unit holder are transferred to the surviving (joint) unitholders. The asset 
management company or AMC would require various documents including a death certificate, 
to be submitted for effecting the transmission.
If there are no joint holders then units would be transmitted to the nominee(s), if any. 
If there are no joint holders, and no nominees, transmission would be in favour of legal heir(s). 
However, this process would require, in addition to a death certificate and other documents 
as referred above, the submission of a probate, or letters of administration, or succession 
certificate. 
Notwithstanding any joint holding, or nomination, a unit holder is entitled to bequeath 
mutual fund units by will (subject to the applicable law of succession).
6.2.3. Securities 
Transmission of securities is transfer of ownership to a nominee, or successor, or legal 
heir, on death of the owner/holder. 
The Securities and Exchange Board of India, being the capital market regulator (SEBI) 
under its circular dated January 4, 2019, required transmission of securities in dematerialized 
form to be dealt with in accordance with the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing 
Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) (Sixth Amendment) Regulations, 2018 (SEBI 
LODR) in order to harmonize the procedure for transmission in dematerialised form, with 
transmission of securities in physical form. 
Broadly, under SEBI LODR:
(a). a succession certificate, or probate, or letters of administration, or court decree, 
as may be applicable, in terms of the ISA is prescribed as a documentary requirement 
for transmission of securities held in physical mode.
(b). On death of a sole account holder, or a joint holder, of shares in dematerialized 
form, the surviving joint holder(s), or nominee(s) or legal heir(s) would be required to 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 62
approach the Depository Participant (DP) with the requisite paperwork for transmission 
of such shares. However, if the shares were in physical form, each company in which 
such shares were held would have to be approached for transmission. 
(c). If a person leaves physical shares held jointly, the shares would pass to the 
surviving joint holder. However, the shares are held solely, then the procedure for 
transmission will depend on whether the person has made a nomination or not, and 
whether there is a probate, succession certificate or letters of administration.
(d). If there is a nomination made in respect of the shares, the nominee would have 
to submit a transmission request form and attach a death certificate attested by a 
notary. 
(e). If there is no nomination, then a duly stamped affidavit executed by all legal 
heirs, or by the identified legal heir would have to be executed if there is a probate, or 
succession certificate, or letters of administration, obtained.
(f). If there is no nominee, and no will, and shares held solely by a person, then, if 
the value of such shares per listed company does not exceed INR 200,000, a simple 
no-objection certificate is required from all legal heirs in favour of the claimant to such 
shares, or alternatively a family settlement executed and notarized by all legal heirs of 
the deceased, each of which must be submitted together with an indemnity bond. 
6.3. Nomination in Life Insurance Policies
Nomination is a process that enables a policyholder to appoint an individual i.e. the 
nominee, who can claim the proceeds of the policy, on death of the policyholder. 
Section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938 deals with nomination and provides that a policyholder 
holding life insurance on his own life, may nominate a person or persons to whom the money 
secured by the policy shall be paid on death.
A nomination can be made either at the time of buying the policy, or at any time before 
the policy matures. A nomination may be changed during the term of the policy. Such change 
should be communicated by the policyholder to the insurer and updated in its records. Where 
a nomination is cancelled or altered by an endorsement, or a bequest is made under a will, a 
notice of such change in nomination should be submitted to the insurer, as the insurer is not 
liable for any payment made under the policy to a nominee of the policy or registered in records 
of the insurer. 
If a nominee is a minor, a guardian/appointee, other than the policyholder himself, has 
to be appointed for it to be effective, and the name of such nominee must be endorsed upon 
the policy itself, based on the name of the nominee mentioned in the proposal form. However, 
a nomination, if not made at the proposal stage, can be made by way of an endorsement in 
the policy subsequently on notice to the insurer. On the receipt of such notice, the insurer will 
register the nomination and make an endorsement on the policy document.
When a policy matures during the lifetime of the policyholder or where the nominee 
dies before the policy matures for payment, the amount secured by the policy is payable to 
the policyholder, or his heirs or legal representatives or the holder of a probate, or letters of 
administration, or succession certificate. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 63
The position, in law, of a nominee of an insurance policy, has been set out in Smt. 
Sarabati Devi & Ors. vs. Usha Devi41 where the Supreme Court held that a mere nomination 
made under section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938 does not have the effect of conferring on 
the nominee any beneficial interest in the proceeds of the policy on the death of the assured, 
as nomination only indicates the hand which is authorised to receive the amount, on the 
payment of which the insurer gets a valid discharge of its liability under the policy. The amount, 
however, can be claimed by the heirs of the assured in accordance with the applicable law of 
succession.
The Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015, introduced the concept of beneficial 
nominee. The nominee in this case is the person who ultimately benefits or owns the insurance 
money. Pursuant to this amendment, when a policyholder nominates parents, spouse or 
children, then the nominee or nominees will be beneficially entitled to the amount payable by 
the insurer. The law also includes reference to rights of a nominee to collect the insurance 
money on maturity, in the event of the policyholder’s death.
6.4. Nomination in Housing Societies 
The law governing co-operative societies is state-specific, and consequently each 
state will usually have its law, and rules and procedure for nomination, by members of cooperative societies, in respect of their shares and premises. For example, the State of 
Maharashtra has the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act 1960, which allows a member 
to nominate person(s) to whom his shares and interest in the society will be transferred by the 
society on death.
Unless the state co-operative law expressly provides to the contrary, nomination does 
not create a new rule of succession, and therefore a nominee will not acquire title/ownership 
on death of the owner. A nominee is considered a trustee who has legal control over the 
property, on behalf of legal heirs, and remains in charge until the court decides as to who is 
entitled to it by relevant laws of succession.
The object of nomination is to avoid confusion in the event of disputes between heirs 
and legal representatives and to uncertainty as to with whom the society should deal with. It 
is highly advisable to make a nomination even in case of joint ownership if both owners die at 
once. 
The Supreme Court, in Indrani Wahi v Registrar of Co-operative Societies & Ors42
observed that a transfer to a nominee would have no relevance as to the issue of title between 
the legal heirs or successors to the property of the deceased and it would also open to them 
to pursue their case of inheritance in consonance with the law.
6.5. Married Women’s Property Act and Estate Planning
Under MWP Act, 1874, all the properties that belong to the married women get 
insulated and protected from all court attachments or any income tax department attachments
that the husband has run up.
41 1984 AIR SC 346
42 Indrani Wahi v Registrar of Co-operative Societies & Ors AIR 2016 SC 1969
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 64
Business people and salaried individuals with loans or liabilities, or people who want 
to protect their wife/children from creditors or relatives who might have fraudulent intentions
should opt for the MWP Act. This is also an excellent solution for a joint family setup, wherein 
there could be several complications in the ownership of property thereby increasing the scope 
of family disputes. In all such cases, a policy covered under the MWP Act gives a clear title to 
the beneficiary.
6.6. Other Tools for Estate Planning – Power of Attorney
Power of Attorney, its use and purpose
The Power of Attorney Act, 1882 defines Power of Attorney as “any instrument 
empowering a specified person to act for and in the name of the person executing it”. Power 
of attorney can be considered as a legal instrument which is granted to a person, thereby 
giving the person an authority to make a decision, or a set of decisions for the principal in 
defined matters (banking, legal, financial investment, business and other purposes). In other 
words, it enables such person to act as an agent for the principal by establishing a principalagent relationship between the two through a legally binding contract.
Need of Power of Attorney
Situations may arise in the lifetime of an individual or a person where it becomes very 
difficult to look after one’s business, professional and legal affairs. The reasons can be old 
age, poor health or disability of an individual. Other reasons can be more nuanced such as 
geographical inaccessibility to perform certain decision making and documentation necessary 
for the progression of a business or professional affair or a lack of expertise in certain domain. 
Business entities may issue power of attorney to its officials to perform professional activities 
and day-to-day legal/regulatory compliances. Power of attorney acts as a legal tool for 
authorizing confidants, professionals and officials for them to perform routine matters or 
specified duties related to property, business or financial transactions and medical care of the 
Principal on its behalf.
Types of Power of Attorney
There are two types of Power of Attorney, basis its application. A General Power of 
Attorney gives wide-ranging powers to the attorney or the agent and authorizes it to do all acts 
connected with a particular trade, business or employment. For example – say A is the 
manager of B’s firm. Under a General Power of Attorney, A’s authority extends to doing of 
everything that is necessary for carrying out the business of B’s firm.
A Special Power of Attorney gives only specific powers to the attorney or the agent 
and therefore authorizes them to do only a single act. For example – say A is employed by B, 
residing in Mumbai to recover a debt due to B in Delhi. A may adopt any legal process 
necessary for the purpose of recovering debt. Once the debt is recovered, the Special Power 
of Attorney ceases to exist, and is deemed to terminate. 
Agents represent the Principal in all property and financial matters as long as the 
Principal’s state of mind is good. In situations where the Principal becomes incapacitated in 
making decisions, the PoA agreement would deem to end automatically. If the Principal wants 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 65
the PoA to remain in effect after the person’s health deteriorates, a durable power of attorney 
needs to be entered into. 
Revocation of Power of Attorney
Power of Attorney can be revocable or irrevocable based on the clauses of the deed
executed. In a revocable PoA, the Power of Attorney is revocable at the will of the principal, 
while in an irrevocable PoA it is not revocable at the will of the principal.
The procedure for revocation has been drawn from the Indian Contract Act, 1872. 
There can be several cases in a principal-agent relationship where the relationship may be 
severed between the attorney and the authorizer. As per Section 201 of the Act, some of the 
conditions for revocation are:
• If either the Principal or the Power of Attorney holder or both become unsound of
mind, die or is/are adjudicated as insolvent by the court.
• If the Power of Attorney holder renounces his powers.
• If the business for which the Power of Attorney was granted gets completed.
Further, applying the general principles given under the law to a Power of Attorney, 
the ways through which such revocation can take place could be:
• Breach of Contract – In case of any gross mismanagement or any breach of duty on 
behalf of the agent, or if it acts beyond its scope of powers as specified in the PoA, the 
Power of Attorney can be revoked.
• Agent’s interest in the Agency – Section 202 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 is 
applicable to situations wherein the agent develops a personal interest in its agency. 
In such case, the Power of Attorney cannot be terminated without the due consent of 
such an agent.
• Actions of the Principal – The Principal brings the relationship to an end through an 
express revocation of the authority granted to an agent.
Procedure to Revoke Power of Attorney
Revocation of a PoA is generally done by first issuing a notice in a local daily 
newspaper or in a national daily. The Principal will have to get a registered cancellation deed
(registered from the office of the respective sub-registrar), and provide a copy for due 
information of such cancellation to the Agent. 
Limitations of Power of Attorney
A Power of Attorney could leave the Principal vulnerable to abuse by entrusting with the Agent
a lot of authority over the Principal’s money, property, and decision-making power. The Agent 
has a fiduciary duty to act in Principal’s best interests. 
The errors and omissions in creating a legally valid PoA exposes the Principal to unintended 
risks which do not have a legal recourse to address later. Undue authority ceded to an Agent 
or not specifying the contours of decision-making in money matters and financial affairs may 
lead to loss of control. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 66
A Power of Attorney also does not address what happens to the assets of the Principal after
his or her death. The PoA deems to end upon the Principal’s death, and so it does not do 
anything to protect Principal’s wealth or its intended distribution. 
Power of Attorney executed abroad
Power of Attorney is a perfect instrument for people living abroad and managing assets 
in India. A PoA can be executed from abroad in two ways:
Legalisation:
In this case, signatures of the notary or judge before whom the PoA is executed are required 
to be authenticated by the duly accredited representative of the Indian Embassy/Consulate. 
According to Section 3 of the Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Oaths and Fees) Act, 1948, 
notarising a deed from an authorized officer of the Indian Consulate/Embassy would be 
considered a valid notary. Such a PoA is not required to be stamped at the time of execution. 
However, it needs to be stamped within three months from the date of receipt of the PoA in 
India.
Apostalisation:
The deed of PoA executed outside India is proven through an apostalisation process which is 
governed by The Hague Convention, 1961. Also known as super legalisation, apostille is a 
certificate which confirms and verifies the signature/seal of the person who authenticated the 
document. However, this deed too needs to comply with the Indian laws such as the Indian 
Registration Act, 1908, and the Power of Attorney Act, 1882.
6.7. Chapter Review Questions
1. Comment on the principal difference between a tenancy in common and a joint 
tenancy.
2. What is ‘transmission’ in relation to mutual funds?
3. What are the legal requirements for transmission of shares credited to a Demat 
account, of a sole holder?
4. How is a nomination treated under the Insurance Act, 1938?
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 67
Chapter 7: Gifts, Trusts & Family 
Arrangements in Estate Planning 
Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this section, students should be able to: 
7-1 Understand basic law relating to gifts of movable and immovable property
7.2 Distinguish between different types of trusts.
7-3 Understand the advantages of adopting a trust vehicle of estate planning.
7-4 Understand the value of trust structures in small/family businesses.
7-5 Understand family arrangements and settlements and their role in estate planning
Topics
7.1. Gifts
7.1.1. Inheritance Tax
7.1.2. Tax on Gifts
7.1.2.1. Moveable Property – Fair Market Value
7.1.2.2. Immovable Property – Stamp Duty
7.2. The Indian Trusts Act,1882
7.2.1. Definitions
7.2.2. Types of Trusts
7.2.2.1. Testamentary & Non-Testamentary Trusts
7.2.2.2. Public, Charitable or Religious Trusts & Private Trusts
7.2.2.3. Revocable & Irrevocable Trusts
7.2.2.4. Non-Discretionary & Discretionary Trusts
7.3. Advantages of Private Trusts
7.3.1. Planning succession
7.3.2. Ring fencing of assets
7.3.3. Tax planning
7.3.4. Protecting persons with special needs
7.3.5. Flexibility 
7.3.6. Transparency in management
7.3.7. Strategic objectives 
7.3.8. Trust as a Pass-through entity 
7.4. Exception – HUF Property 
7.5. Succession planning for small businesses
7.6. Business succession 
7.7. Offshore Trusts
7.8. Family Arrangements
7.9. Chapter Review Questions 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 68
7.1. Gifts
Section 122 of TOPA defines gift as a voluntary transfer of property inter vivos (that is 
between living persons), without compensation or any type of consideration. While a gift has 
to be voluntary, and for no consideration, it need not be made out of natural love and affection. 
Sections 123 to 129 of TOPA deal with transfers by gift, registration, revocation, and other 
matters.
A gift will effect a transfer of the entire ownership over the property, or interest therein 
that has been gifted, and donor cedes title completely. However, in the case of immovable 
properties, a donor may retain and reserve reasonable fetters during his lifetime, including 
restrictions on alienation, and/or a life interest, that is, a right of residence to the donor and 
has family members.
An instrument of gift is executed by a donor (the giver of the gift) and a donee (the 
recipient of the gift) under which movable or immoveable property is transferred.
If an immovable property above the value of INR 100 is to be gifted, the instrument of 
gift is required to be compulsorily registered. The instrument of gift must also be attested by 
two witnesses in addition to the donor and must record acceptance by the donee of the gift. 
While a gift may be effected by delivery, it is advisable to record the same in writing. 
The writing will be optionally registrable. As with immovable property, there has to be an 
acceptance of the gift, by or on behalf of the donee. Acceptance may be express or implied. 
However, it must be done during the lifetime of the donor, and while he is still legally capable 
of giving the gift. If a donee dies before accepting a gift, it is void43
. 
Other Matters Related To Gifts 
(a). A gift by a minor is void, as a minor is not considered capable of contracting. A natural 
guardian of the minor can accept a gift made to a minor on his behalf, on the condition 
that the person nominated in the gift deed will act as a manager of the gifted property.
(b). A gift cannot be revoked once it is made, except under section 126 of the TOPA.44
(c). Mohammedan law permits, with certain conditions, an oral gift to be made of 
immovable property, is known as ‘Hiba’. 
43 Section 122 of Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
44 Section 126 of Transfer of Property Act, 1882: When gift may be suspended or revoked - The donor and donee 
may agree that on the happening of any specified event which does not depend on the will of the donor a gift shall 
be suspended or revoked; but a gift which the parties agree shall be revocable wholly or in part, at the mere will of 
the donor, is void wholly or in part, as the case may be. A gift may also be revoked in any of the cases (save want 
or failure of consideration) in which, if it were a contract, it might be rescinded. Save as aforesaid, a gift cannot be 
revoked. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the rights of transferees for consideration 
without notice.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 69
7.1.1. Inheritance Tax 
Inheritance tax is typically levied on the value of assets received by legal heirs by 
inheritance (that is, both testamentary and intestate succession). Inheritance tax (known as 
‘Estate Duty’) was abolished in 1985. At present there is no inheritance tax in India.
7.1.2. Tax on Gifts
Gifts are taxable, subject to certain exemptions based on value of the gift, relationship 
between donor and donee. Under the IT Act, any amount received by an individual person or 
a HUF over Rs. 50,000/- in a financial year from an unrelated person, in cash or by way of 
credit, will be included as income. If the value of all the gifts taken together exceeds Rs 50,000, 
then, the aggregate of the gifts received become taxable without any threshold exemption. 
Similar to inheritance being not taxable, money received in contemplation of death of an 
individual or Karta or member of a HUF is also exempt from Income Tax.
Tax exemptions are provided in respect of gifts between close relatives. Consequently, 
the gift of any asset (movable or immovable) made to certain specified relatives, is exempt 
from income tax in the hand of the recipient, without limit. Close relatives includes parents, 
children, spouse, siblings, siblings of the spouse, lineal ascendants and descendants of the 
person and his/her spouse. The list also includes spouse of the abovementioned persons.
Under section 56(2) of the IT Act, if an asset is gifted to certain specified relatives 
during a person’s lifetime, there is no tax liability for the beneficiary. Similarly, any asset that 
is willed or inherited by the beneficiary is free of tax. Further, gifts received are taxable in the 
hands of recipient under the head “income from other sources” and there is no taxation for the 
donor. In this case gift means any sum of money, moveable property or immovable property 
which is received without consideration.
In Smt Geeta Dubey vs. Income-tax Officer45
, Dubey ( Assessee) received a gift of Rs 
50,000 from her father and a gift of Rs 50,000 from her sister-in-law. The assessing officer 
examined this receipt and during the assessment proceedings, the assesse had established 
the identity of both the abovementioned donors and also proved that the gifts were received 
through proper banking channels. Further, the officer also accepted the fact that since these 
were receipts from the Assessee’s father and sister-in-law, they qualified as “relatives” under 
section 56 of the IT Act. However, the assessing officer contended that the gifts would be 
subject to income tax since the occasion for which the gift was received was not declared by 
the Assesse. The same contention was upheld by the Commissioner of Income-Tax (Appeals). 
The issue was then raised for consideration before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 
(“ITAT”). The ITAT ruled that since the identity of the donors had been established and as 
they qualified as relatives for the taxpayer to claim an exemption, the need to prove by an 
explanation on the occasion for which gift was received, was not mandatory. 
45 (2018) 172 ITD 538 (Indore) (Trib.)
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 70
7.1.2.1. Movable Property – Fair Market Value 
Fair market value is the price at which property changes hands between a willing 
buyer and a willing seller, neither being under any compulsion to buy or to sell, and both having 
reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. Section (22B) of the IT Act defines “Fair Market 
Value” (FMV) as "the price that the capital asset would ordinarily fetch on sale in the open 
market on the relevant date”. To summarise, FMV is the price that an asset will sell on the 
open market. An asset's FMV should represent an accurate valuation or assessment of its 
worth. In respect of gifts, FMV is an important figure to arrive at for determination of the tax 
liability on such gift.
Determination of FMV for inventory as per the Income Tax Rules
Rule 11UAB, which came into force from April 1, 2019 and applies in relation with 
prospective effect to subsequent years provides for determination of FMV of different classes 
of assets/inventory converted into or treated as capital assets in the following manner (for the 
purpose of computation for section 28 of the IT Act):
(a). Immovable property (land or building or both): value adopted or assessed or 
assessable by any authority of the Central Government or a State Government for the 
purpose of stamp duty on the date on which the inventory is converted into, or treated, 
as a capital asset;
(b). For jewellery, archaeological collections, drawings, paintings, sculptures, any work of 
art, shares or securities referred to in rule 11UA: value determined in the manner 
provided in sub-rule (1) of rule 11UA and for this purpose the reference to the valuation 
date in the rule 11U and rule 11UA shall be the date on which the inventory is converted 
into, or treated, as a capital asset;
(c). For other property: price that it would ordinarily fetch on sale in the open market on the 
date on which the inventory is converted into, or treated, as a capital asset.
7.1.2.2. Immovable Property – Stamp Duty 
The Indian Stamp Act, 1899 is a federal law governing stamp duty in India. However, 
stamp duty being a State subject, each State has either enacted a separate state law for the 
charge and recovery of stamp duty, or has adopted the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, with Statespecific amendments. 
Stamp duty is, inter alia, chargeable upon instruments of transfer of property, and is, 
in most cases, levied ad valorem, that is on the basis of market value of the subject property. 
Rates of stamp duty will vary from state to state, and in cases of immovable properties will 
depend on factors such as the nature of the property, development potential, the user of the 
property, the age and location of, and the amenities related to, the property. Concessions are 
available to certain classes of persons and properties. 
It is relevant to know that stamp duty is a tax levied on an instrument, and not a 
transaction, or property. If an instrument is required to be stamped and is not, it would not be 
admissible in legal proceedings as evidence. An unstamped and unregistered instrument of 
transfer will not pass title to the property. A gift deed consisting of immovable property attracts 
stamp duty.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 71
Stamp Duty implications on a Gift
An instrument of gift will typically attract stamp duty in India. Rates will vary from state 
to state. An unstamped instrument of gift will not be ordered for registration, and an 
unregistered gift is void.
7.2. The Indian Trusts Act, 1882
The Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (ITA) is the principal statute governing private trusts. It 
includes provisions in relation to the creation and formation of trusts, types of trusts, the parties 
to a trust, rights and liabilities of trustees and beneficiaries, and the requirements of a valid 
trust deed. 
The ITA does not apply to a waqf and religious or charitable endowments under 
Mohammedan Law or the “mutual relations of members of an undivided family as determined 
by any customary or personal law”. State-specific legislation has been enacted by some states 
in respect of charitable and religious trusts, endowments, etc., which do not apply to private 
trusts.
Section 3 of the ITA defines a trust as “an obligation annexed to the ownership of 
property and arising out of a confidence reposed in and accepted by the owner, or declared 
and accepted by him, for the benefit of another, or of another and the owner”. Therefore, a 
trust is an agreement between two persons, under which property of one is held by the other, 
usually for the benefit of a third party (beneficiary). 
7.2.1. Definitions 
Author/Settlor 
A person who creates a trust of property owned by him is called the ‘author’ or ‘settlor’ 
of the trust. A settlor can decide upon the manner/mode and purpose of formation of the trust, 
names and number of trustees, the beneficiaries, and matters concerning management and 
administration of the trust. The settlor transfers to the trustees, the property which will be 
initially held on trust, that is, trust property or corpus as referred below.
Trustee 
A person that holds and manages trust property for the benefit of a beneficiary is known 
as its ‘trustee’. Any person capable of contracting (that is, who has attained the legal age of 
majority, being of sound mind and not disqualified by law) may act as a trustee. A trustee may 
be a living person or an artificial entity including a corporation firm, bank or other institution. 
There are also entities formed with the specific objective of assisting in establishing and 
managing trusts, and who act as trustees, known as ‘professional trustees’.
A trustee acts in a fiduciary capacity, in that he will manage the trust, and hold, deal 
with and administer trust property and income of the trust, for the benefit of its beneficiaries; 
but not for the trustee’s own benefit. A trustee, in such fiduciary capacity, holds legal title and 
ownership of trust property, both movable and immovable. Chapter III sets out the duties and 
liabilities of trustees. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 72
Protector
A settlor may not desire to be a trustee, whether for maintaining legal separation or for 
legal and tax reasons. However, for ensuring the trust is managed and administered by the 
trustees in accordance with the trust deed, and for safeguarding the interests of its 
beneficiaries, a settlor may retain oversight and control by assuming the position of, or 
appointing another person, as ‘protector’ of the trust. A protector may possess certain 
overriding or material powers under the trust deed, including removal or replacement of 
trustees and approval right over the disposal or investment of trust properties and application 
of the trust income. However, the trustees continue to be the primary functionaries of a trust 
and they alone hold the trust property.
Beneficiary 
A beneficiary is the person for whom the trust is created, and who typically receives 
income arising from the trust. A beneficiary may be an individual, group, body or association 
of persons, and even an artificial entity. The only requirement is that a beneficiary must be a 
person capable of holding property, which includes minors, persons who are disabled 
(mentally or physically) persons, and unborn children. Beneficiaries possess certain rights and 
liabilities under Chapter VI. 
Trust Property
The property transferred by a settlor for the benefit of the beneficiaries of the trust, is 
called ‘trust property’, or ‘corpus’, or the ‘trust fund’. Accretions to, and income arising out of, 
trust property, may also be included, if the trust deed provides. Trust property can be settled 
upon the trust by the settlor, and can be added to, from time to time, by the settlor and/or any 
other persons, through donations and gifts, if the trust deed provides. If a trust is irrevocable, 
a settlor cedes title and control over property settled upon the trust. 
Trust Deed
Section 3 defines a trust deed as the “instrument, if any, by which the Trust is declared”. 
A trust deed will typically contain provisions setting out the rights, powers and obligations of 
the trustees, the manner in which trust property and income will be dealt with, invested and 
applied, beneficiary distributions, successor beneficiaries, replacement and removal of and 
appointment of successor trustees, and the date of termination of the trust and distribution of 
the trust fund amongst beneficiaries. 
7.2.2. Types of Trusts
7.2.2.1. Testamentary & Non-Testamentary Trusts
A testamentary trust is created under a will, and comes into existence effect after the 
testator’s death. 
A trust created during the settlor’s lifetime is a non-testamentary trust and is usually 
created under an instrument. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 73
7.2.2.2. Public, Charitable or Religious Trusts & Private Trusts
Public Trust
A public trust is created for the benefit of the public, or a section of the public. It may 
be religious or charitable in nature. The nature of a public trust is determined by its 
beneficiaries. As public trusts may have altruistic objects, they may be conferred tax 
exemptions and benefits. A public trust may continue in perpetuity or for an indefinite period.
Private Trust
Any trust which is not a public trust is considered as a private trust. Private trusts 
cannot exist indefinitely as they are governed by the rule against perpetuity. 
7.2.2.3. Revocable & Irrevocable Trusts
Revocable Trust
A trust in which the settlor has expressly reserved the right of revocation or reassumption of the trust property is known as a revocable trust. A revocable trust may not ringfence assets and the assets of the trust may be attached in recovery of the settlor’s of debts 
under law. In addition, assets transferred to a trust by a settlor would continue to be treated 
as the settlor’s assets, under income tax law. 
Irrevocable Trust
An irrevocable trust is one where the settlor has no right to re-assume trust property, 
and the trust deed cannot be revoked or amended. In an irrevocable trust, the settlor cedes 
the ownership and control over trust property and on his death will not form part of his estate. 
7.2.2.4. Non-Discretionary & Discretionary Trusts 
Non-Discretionary Trusts
A trust in which the beneficiaries and/or their shares are also determined is known as 
a non-discretionary trust, or a determinate, or specific trust. Trustees do not have any 
discretion over the distribution of the benefits and income of such trust, amongst beneficiaries.
Discretionary Trust
A trust in which beneficiaries are not named and/or their beneficial shares not stated 
is a discretionary trust. Typically, the settlor, or trustees, or protector, will possess rights to 
decide upon the beneficiaries and/or their beneficial shares. This may be undertaken through 
a ‘letter of wishes’, or by resolutions or other writings issued by the trustees or protector. The 
trust deed may also provide conditions and parameters for determining beneficiaries and their 
beneficial shares. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 74
Other Trusts
A settlor may also adopt a flexible structure that combines elements of the broad 
categories of trusts outlined above, such as a revocable specific trust, a revocable 
discretionary trust, an irrevocable specific trust and an irrevocable discretionary trust.
7.3. Advantages of Private Trusts
Trusts have gained popularity over recent years for various reasons, including planning 
succession and safeguarding against disputes and challenges over a will, ring-fencing assets, 
tax planning and hedging against inheritance tax (if introduced). These and other benefits are 
highlighted below: 
7.3.1. Planning succession
A trust is an effective vehicle in planning succession, as assets are transferred to the 
trust during the lifetime of a settlor and will not form a part of his estate on his death (assuming 
an irrevocable trust). The apparent benefit is avoidance of disputes and litigation over the 
estate or will of the settlor after his death, and the estate being tied up for substantial time. 
While a person may not wish to settle all his assets upon trust, if there is a perception that 
ownership of certain assets may be the subject to disputes post death, he has the option to 
settle them upon trust during his lifetime, so as to ensure that, after his death, his wishes are 
implemented and not subject to challenge and dispute.
7.3.2. Ring fencing assets 
If a settlor divests ownership and control over an asset by creating an irrevocable trust, 
he, subject to certain laws, may effectively ring-fence them from tax and creditors’ claims. 
Once the asset is transferred into the irrevocable trust, it is no longer the property of the settlor. 
It is relevant to note that if a trust is created by a settlor with the primary or sole motive of 
defeating the rights and claims of the government, or of creditors, it may be subject to 
challenge, and transfer of assets to such trust could be voided, and the assets attached, 
depending upon the facts of the case, and applicable law (including bankruptcy law).
7.3.3. Tax planning
Private trusts may be created with the objective of generating wealth and income for 
certain beneficiaries and as a tool of tax planning. Further, a person may wish to divest 
ownership of assets, in view of concerns over the possible introduction of inheritance tax. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 75
7.3.4. Protecting persons with special needs
A private trust may be a tool to manage and provide for family members having special 
needs, or who are unable manage their affairs, including infants, minor children or persons 
with disabilities. 
7.3.5. Flexibility 
The trust structure provides flexibility in creation of a suitable trust tailor-made to the 
wishes and desires of the settlor. For example, in a non-discretionary trust, beneficiaries will 
have a specific beneficial share and interest, which cannot be altered. On the other hand, if 
the settlor wishes to account for changes in circumstances, or adversity, a discretionary trust 
may be a suitable choice, as it allows for flexibility in the determining beneficiaries and/or their 
beneficial shares and interest. 
7.3.6. Transparency in management 
On a trust being created, its control and management vests in its trustees, and they 
are mandated to operate within the powers and authorities granted to them under the trust 
deed, as section 11 binds them to fulfil the purposes of trust and ensure that the instructions 
of the settlor are followed. 
Section 17 further provides that trustees are bound to act impartially, and execute the 
trust for the advantage of all beneficiaries. Beneficiaries are also granted recourse under the 
ITA if they believe a trustee is not fulfilling his obligations and duties.
7.3.7. Strategic objectives 
Although, in an irrevocable trust, a settlor cedes title and control over trust property, 
he may retain effective control and management over it and the trust, through the trust deed, 
and through a ‘protector’ (which may be the settlor himself). A settlor can allocate and 
apportion trust assets in a manner that suits his strategic objectives and to provide control the 
extent and manner beneficiaries will derive benefits. 
7.3.8 Trust as a pass-through entity
Trusts are commonly used as vehicles to pool investments such as holdings of 
securities and mutual funds. A tax pass through mechanism is a fairly common advantage, 
where income generated by the trust, passes to the beneficiaries tax-free, and is taxed in their 
hands. 
Sections 115 UA and 115 UB of the IT Act, provide that the distribution of income by a 
business trust or investment fund to its unit holders/investors is to be made without any 
deduction of tax. This would, however, not apply to a revocable trust.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 76
Trusts have also been used as alternate investment funds (AIFs), real estate 
investment trusts (REITs) and infrastructure investment funds (“InvIT’s) in view of such pass 
through mechanism. Under regulation (2)(1)(b) of the SEBI (Alternative Investment Funds) 
Regulations, 2012, an AIF can be established as a trust in addition to a company, LLP or body 
corporate. Prior to the introduction the Finance Act, 2015, all AIFs were not considered to be 
eligible for “pass through status”, whereas trusts were accorded such status. Even after the 
eligibility criteria was extended to AIFs formed by companies and LLPs, the trust structure is 
preferred as the other entities are governed by more stringent legislation such as the 
Companies Act, 2013 or the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008. 
While choosing a suitable structure to set up an AIF through a trust structure, factors 
such as determinacy and revocability are essential. An irrevocable determinate Trust is 
appropriate as there is no discretion vested in the trustee to terminate the trust. Beneficiaries 
are also ascertained and identified, easing the reporting of pass through income.
7.4. Exception – HUF property
The exception carved out by section 1 of “mutual relations of members of an undivided 
family” is generally understood to apply to HUF property. If a trust is sought to be created by 
a settlor for holding any HUF property, the settlor does not possess legal right and interest 
over the same and therefore the subject matter of the Trust will be unlawful. 
7.5. Succession planning for small businesses
Establishing an effective plan for succession that is sustainable is essential for owners 
or proprietors of small businesses and assumes even greater significance for small family 
businesses. 
If a family business is held by a corporation, a non-testamentary trust may be a suitable 
vehicle to hold the shares of such company. A trust as shareholder would efficiently collect 
and distribute dividend income between family members who are its beneficiaries, maintain 
oversight and control over the company’s management, and also, if required, retain control 
over key decisions over investment, expansion and divestment. Its trustees would act in the 
common interest of all beneficiaries. This would avoid the inherent issues that sometimes arise 
with a disparate group of shareholders who may hold varying views and opinions on such 
matters, and which may create a potential for disputes and a resultant loss to the operations 
and value of the family business.
7.6. Business Succession 
The aim of every business is to maintain growth, profitability and longevity. In a report 
published in 2018, Credit Suisse observed that India was home to the third largest number of 
family owned businesses in the world with an estimated total of 111 companies with a total 
market capitalization of USD 839 billion. The shareholding pattern of a majority of listed Indian 
firms comprised promoters holding a controlling stake in family held businesses and family 
members or distant relatives from extended families occupying prime managerial positions. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 77
In this scenario, there is a need for family-owned and managed business to provide for 
a smooth and seamless planned transition and succession to persons appointed and chosen 
by the owner. While strong internal relationships based on trust and understanding are 
essential for a hand over to a succeeding generation, a comprehensive business succession 
plan will facilitate a smooth inter-generational transfer, reduce intra-family conflicts and 
disputes, enable continuity and preserve and maintain wealth created by prior generations. 
A robust business succession plan can be coupled with a trust structure, include 
appointment of successors, or trustees responsible for the functioning of the business (who 
may also be family members), establish guidelines for business operations and distribution of 
income or dividends and allow for retention of management control. 
Such a plan can also: (i) create clear divisions between members’ personal and 
professional responsibilities, (ii) determine professional roles and duties, (iii) demarcate 
ownership interests/shares, (iv) provide transparent functioning and reporting, including with 
respect to business decisions, (iv) establish an efficient dispute resolution mechanism, and (v) 
provide for independent expert advice, including through a trust structure.
Disputes over intellectual property rights (IPRs) of family business are not unusual, 
especially when there is division of businesses between family members, with each claiming 
rights over the IPR. A business succession plan can provide for this, with a family trust holding 
the IPR having family members as its beneficiaries. Such trust would provide for 
apportionment between beneficiaries of royalty generated, non-compete agreements and 
concurrent use of the IPR, including for same/different classes of goods/services.
7.7. Offshore Trusts
With an increase of high net-worth individuals (HNI’s) holding assets in India and 
overseas, the cross boundary ramifications of a trust structure, from a tax and regulatory 
aspect, require consideration. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI), through the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999 (FEMA) and Exchange Control Regulations, controls cross border 
transfer of funds and regulates the parties to a trust on the basis of residential status.
An offshore trust, in the Indian context, is a trust formed outside India by an Indian 
resident, and, in addition to the laws of the resident jurisdiction, will be subject to such Indian 
exchange control laws and regulations as well as Indian taxation law. Other legislations such 
as the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 and Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign 
Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015 should also be considered in relation to 
a foreign trust.
FEMA allows an Indian resident to hold, own, transfer or invest in foreign currency, 
security and also immovable property outside India if such assets were owned, held or 
acquired by him while he was a resident outside India or if he has inherited property from a 
person who was resident outside India. If an Indian resident wishes to transfer funds and 
property to an offshore trust, he may do so through the Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS), 
under which upto USD 250,000 per person per financial year may be remitted overseas 
without RBI permission. 
Based on the complexity of options available in a trust structure, factors such as 
residency status of beneficiaries and location of assets play an important role in deciding the 
best suited entity, which is also tax efficient in both India and abroad. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 78
7.8. Family Arrangements
A family arrangement or settlement is a vehicle adopted by families to agree to and 
effect distribution and transfer of businesses and/or assets (movable and/or immovable) 
between their members. The arrangement or settlement is effectively a ‘contract’ in law. It may 
provide for immediate transfers of any or all business, assets or properties, and/or contemplate 
transfers in future, including a specified date, or during a specific time period, or on the 
occurrence of an event such as the death of particular family member or a combination of 
them.
There is no ‘one size fits all’ in a family arrangement or settlement, each family having 
its own objectives. However, while these may vary, the prime motive is usually to settle existing 
disputes, or avoid potential and future disputes arising, between family members, especially 
when a family has grown and succeeding generations have come into existence, and/or are 
actively involved. 
A family arrangement or settlement, based on its objectives, may involve all, or select, 
family members, and/or some or all businesses, assets, and properties. Accordingly, the 
instruments that may be employed will vary. Typically, these may include all, or a combination, 
of the following:
(a). a memorandum or an agreement of family arrangement which either sets out 
the acts, deeds, matters and things to be completed, or which itself operates as an 
instrument of transfer of any or all assets. Stamp duty and registration would be 
attracted on such instrument of a transfer of any assets are effected.
(b). instruments of gift under which assets and properties, or a share or interest 
therein, are gifted;
(c). instruments creating a private trust for the benefit of certain family members 
and/or their children and/or future generations, and/or the transfer to such trust assets 
and properties, or a share or interest therein;
(d). instruments of sale and transfer, for transfer of assets and properties, or a 
share or interest therein;
(e). an instrument setting out a business succession plan, including management 
goals, expansion, and rights and obligations of family members; 
(f). one or more wills bequeathing assets and properties, or a share or interest 
therein (though as stated in Chapter 4, a will can be altered and replaced with a new 
will); and,
(g). a memorandum or recording of the family arrangement or settlement, which 
serves, inter alia, as recording of all acts, deeds, matters and things done and 
completed in effecting and completing the same. Such instrument does not require 
compulsory registration under the Registration Act, as long as it does not effect 
transfers of assets or properties, or is an agreement or contract to do so. 
If disputes arise between parties to a family arrangement or settlement, or a party fails 
or refuses to adhere or comply, the arrangement or settlement being a ‘contract’, it would have 
to be settled, or enforced, through a dispute resolution process. If there is an instrument that 
records the arrangement or settlement, and it expressly provides that disputes will be 
addressed and settled by mediation and/or arbitration, then the same would govern, failing 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 79
which disputes would have to be resolved by adopting proceedings before a court of 
competent jurisdiction.
In designing, formulating and implementing a family arrangement and settlement, 
various factors have to be taken into consideration, in addition to the motives, objectives, 
wishes and desires of family members. These include taxation, stamp duty, registration, and 
applicability of laws, rules, and regulations, or contractual conditions or covenants, that impact, 
and/or impose conditions or restrictions on transfer of businesses, assets and properties. 
7.9. Chapter Review Questions
1. How is a gift of immovable property made?
2. What are the elements applied in relation to stamp duty payable upon an instrument 
of gift?
3. What is a trust?
4. Who can be a trustee?
5. How are testamentary trust and a non-testamentary trusts created?
6. What is the primary difference between a revocable trust and an irrevocable trust?
7. How does a business succession plan assist a family owned business?
8. How do trusts help in managing family owned business IPR? 
9. What is an offshore trust and what assets can it hold? How can it be funded?
10. Enumerate the instruments that may be employed in a family arrangement. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 80
Answers to Chapter Review Questions 
Chapter 1
1. The different types of succession by which the property of a deceased will devolve is 
testamentary succession, that is a valid will which provides the terms for devolution of 
property, or by intestate succession, where there is no will, or an invalid will. In case of 
intestate succession property will devolve according to the personal laws of intestate 
succession governing the deceased. 
2. There are three different types of domicile: (i) domicile of origin, (ii) domicile of choice, 
and (iii) domicile by operation of law. 
3. Section 6 of the ISA provides that for the purpose of succession, an individual may 
have only one domicile.
4. The ISA provides that the original domicile of a legitimate child will be the country of 
domicile of the father, at the time of the child’s birth, and the domicile of an illegitimate 
child, will be the country of domicile of the mother, at the time of the child’s birth.
5. The principle difference between lineal and collateral consanguinity is: (i) lineal 
consanguinity exists between two people who have either ascended or descended in 
a direct line from the other, and (ii) collateral consanguinity exists between two people 
who have neither ascended or descended in a direct line from the other, but have 
descended from a common ancestor.
6. A person will have died intestate if (i) he or she has died without a will (also known as 
total intestacy), (ii) where there is a will not dealing with the entire estate, in which case 
a person will be deemed to have died intestate in respect of the part of his or her estate 
that is not dealt with in the will (this is known as partial intestacy), and (ii) where there 
is a will that is invalid in whole or part, also known as partial intestacy.
7. Yes, a will can be partially void to the extent of invalid bequests. The invalid bequests 
will not operate and will have no legal effect. 
8. Immovable property is governed by the principle of lex situs under section 5(1) thereof, 
which provides that devolution of immovable property in India will be governed by the 
laws of India regardless of domicile at the time of death, and moveable property will 
be governed by the principle of lex domicilli under section 5(2), which provides that 
devolution of moveable property will be governed by the laws of the country in which 
the deceased was domiciled at death.
9. A succession certificate is granted by a court, to heirs, to establish authenticity and 
their entitlement to an inheritance. It is granted by a District Court pursuant to a petition 
and may be granted to a person of sound mind, not being a minor and having interest 
in the property of the deceased.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 81
10. While granting letters of administration, preference is given to the widow/widower, then 
to persons beneficially entitled to the estate, failing which, to (a) creditor(s). It will be 
granted to person who has the best title to the estate.
Chapter 2
1. Intestate succession for Hindus, Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists is governed by the HSA, 
while testamentary succession for them is governed by the ISA. Testamentary and 
intestate succession for Muslims is governed by uncodified Mohammedan law. 
Testamentary and intestate succession for Parsis, Indian Christians and persons 
married under the Special Marriages Act, 1954 is governed by the ISA.
2. The HSA applies to Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs and Jains by religion, and other person 
who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion. 
3. No, the HSA only governs intestate succession while testamentary succession for such 
groups is governed by the ISA. 
4. A HUF comprises a common ancestor and lineal male descendants, their wives and 
daughters. 
5. When distributing the property of a deceased, full blood relatives are preferred over 
half blood relatives. In the absence of both relatives, property goes to uterine blood 
relatives.
6. If two persons die at the same time making it impossible to know who survived whom, 
it is assumed that the younger of the two deceased survived the elder.
7. According to section 8, the property must be first distributed amongst the heirs falling 
under class I, failing which class II heirs, failing which amongst agnates, and, lastly, 
cognates of the deceased.
8. The Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 introduced several changes including, 
grant of equal coparcenary rights to females, abolition of survivorship, allotment of 
shares in coparcenary property to females equal to males, right of a female to claim 
partition. 
9. The Quran, the Sunna, Ijma and Qiyas are considered the primary sources of Muslim 
law in India. There are mainly two different schools of Muslim law divided on the basis 
of the sects formed after the death of Prophet Mohammed, (i) the Sunni school of law, 
and (ii) the Shia school of law. These schools are further subdivided into schools based 
on sects.
10. A will must be in respect of property capable of being transferred and which exists at 
the time of the testator’s death. Only one-third the estate may be bequeathed by will, 
subject to certain conditions and exceptions as prescribed by Shia law and Sunni law. 
Under Shia law, a testator can only dispose of the one-third to an heir or a complete 
stranger (non-heir), without the consent of heirs. Any bequest in excess of one-third, 
whether to an heir or a complete stranger, cannot take effect and is invalid, unless all 
other heirs consent. Such consent may be given before or after the testator’s death. 
Under Sunni law, a testator may dispose up to one-third of his estate only to a stranger, 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 82
without having to obtain consent of other heirs. However, bequest of up to one-third of 
property to an heir will require consent of the other heirs after the testator's death.
11. Under Sunni law, when property is bequeathed to a child in the womb and the child is 
not born within six months of the testator’s death, the bequest will lapse. Under Shia 
law, if property is bequeathed to a child in the womb, the bequest is valid if the child is 
born within 10 lunar months.
12. Under Sunni law, a bequest in favour of a person who caused the death of the testator, 
whether intentionally or accidentally, will not take effect; whereas under Shia law, the 
bequest will not take effect only when the death of the testator has been caused 
intentionally. 
Chapter 3
1. Anyone who is of sound mind and has attained the legal age of majority can dispose 
of their property by a will. 
2. Part I deals with intestate succession as applicable to Christians, Parsis and Jews and 
Part VI deals with testamentary succession as applicable to wills made by the same 
groups as well as Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs and Jainas, subject to territorial exceptions. 
3. A lapsed legacy fails to take effect as a result of the death of a legatee before the death 
of the testator or before the legacy is payable. 
4. Inheritance is the passing of the title to an estate upon death, and a bequest is the act 
of bequeathing or leaving a thing under a will.
5. The rule against perpetuity is contained in section 114, which provides that any 
bequest will be invalid where vesting of interest in property bequeathed is delayed 
beyond the lifetime of any persons living at the date of the testator's death and the 
minority of some person who shall be in existence at the expiration of that period and 
to whom, if he attains full age, will own/inherit the bequeathed property. It applies to 
movable and immovable property. Section 14 of TOPA also provides for it, and limits 
the maximum time period beyond which property cannot be transferred.
6. A bequest of a specified part of a property is a specific legacy, and the bequest of a 
certain sum arising from any property is a demonstrative legacy. If specified property 
is given, the legacy is specific, and if the legacy to be paid out of specified property, it 
is demonstrative. Example - If A bequeaths all his residential properties to B it is a 
specific legacy, If A bequeaths a monthly maintenance to B, payable out of rent arising 
out of commercial properties, it is a demonstrative legacy. 
Chapter 4
1. A will is an instrument of testamentary succession, which specifies the manner in which 
the property of the testator (maker of the will) will devolve after his or her death, that 
is, the distribution of the property of the deceased and in what proportion and manner. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 83
2. The law broadly recognizes and classifies wills as follows: 
(i) Privileged Will and Unprivileged Will: Under section 65 a privileged will may be made 
in extraordinary circumstances like war or a dangerous expedition. Such will may be 
made orally or in writing. An unprivileged will is one made by a person who does not 
fall within the exception carved out for privileged wills.
(ii) Contingent Will: It becomes effective on the occurrence or fulfilment of a specified 
condition or contingency mentioned therein, non-fulfilment of which renders the will 
inoperative. 
(iii) Concurrent Will: Two wills written by the same person, each will providing 
instructions on how certain assets of the testator are to be distributed. 
(iv) Mutual Will: A will executed by two persons (both testators) who mutually agree on 
certain terms and conditions and confer reciprocal benefits on each other, making each 
other legatees. The terms and conditions of such a will are binding on the surviving 
testator after the death of the other. 
(v) Joint Will: A will made by two or more persons for determining how their joint estate 
will devolve upon their beneficiaries. It must stipulate conditions in the case of death 
of one of the testators. If the will is to take effect after the death of two or more persons, 
then it is not enforceable during the lifetime of the other(s). The surviving testator(s) 
is/are bound to the terms and provisions of the will, as they can only be altered or 
amended with consent by both or all testators.
(vi) Holograph Will: A will that is entirely handwritten. 
(vii) Duplicate Will: Two or more copies of a will executed by a testator. Usually one 
copy is kept with the testator and the other with another person.
3. The key ingredients of a valid will are: (i) the testator must be a major, (ii) the will must 
be a legal declaration of the testator’s intention; (iii) that declaration must be with 
respect to the testator’s property; (iv) the desire expressed that the declaration should 
be effectuated after his death, (v) signed by the testator in the presence of two or more 
witnesses, who are subsequently required to attest, (vi) the testator should be of sound 
mind and disposing capacity, and not be subject to fraud, coercion, compulsion or 
duress at the time of making the will.
4. It is not mandatory to register a will under section 18 of the Registration Act. Wills are 
included in the category documents of which registration is optional. Due to this 
exclusion from mandatory registration, the genuineness of a will in India cannot be 
challenged on the grounds of its non-registration.
5. A codicil is a written document that is executed by a person to modify, add to, amend, 
clarify, or revoke provisions of a previously executed will. A codicil effectuates a 
change in an existing will without requiring a new will.
6. In order to modify, alter or amend a will, the testator may do any of the following: (i) 
overwrite the original will which will require signatures of the attesting witnesses, (ii) 
prepare a supplemental document known as a codicil, or (ii) execute a new will. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 84
Chapter 5
1. An executor of a will is defined by section 2(c), as a person to whom the execution of 
the last will of a deceased person is by, the testator’s appointment, confided. An 
executor derives his authority from the will and is appointed by the testator to fulfil the 
last wishes of the testator as prescribed by his or her will and ensure that his estate is 
distributed in accordance with the will.
2. Section 2(a) defines an administrator as a person appointed by the competent authority 
to administer the estate of the deceased person when there is no executor.
3. There is no difference between an executor and an administrator in terms of their 
duties. The difference is with respect to their appointment, that is, an executor is 
nominated by the will of a deceased, failing which, or in case there is no will, 
an administrator may be appointed by a court to manage or administer the deceased’s 
estate.
4. Powers of an executor: 
The powers of an executor are contained in Chapter VI. An executor may sue to 
recover debts in respect of all cause of action that survive the deceased, prosecute or 
defend any action or special proceeding subject to certain exceptions, dispose of 
property, distribute the estate in accordance with the will, and exercise general powers 
of administration including expenditure on acts necessary for the administration of the 
estate.
Duties of an executor: 
The executor’s duties are contained in Chapter VII. After taking inventory and 
assessing the value of the estate, an executor is to ensure compliance order set out in 
which the estate is to be apportioned with regard to debts and expenses. Firstly, 
expenses incurred on funeral ceremonies, death-bed charges including medical 
attendance and stay for one month preceding death, are to be paid. Secondly, 
expenses of obtaining probate and costs that may be incurred in respect of judicial 
proceedings necessary to administer estate, are to be paid. Thirdly, wages due to any 
labourer, artisan or domestic servant, for services rendered within three months of 
death, are to be paid. And lastly, other debts according to their respective priorities 
need to be discharged. Further, debts are to be paid before payment of legacies. When 
all these steps have been completed, the executor can move a petition for permission 
to distribute what is left of the assets to the beneficiaries under the will. 
5. 'Probate' means a copy of a will certified under the seal of a court of competent 
jurisdiction with a grant of administration of the estate of the testator. A probate can be 
granted only to the executor appointed under the will. A probate is granted to an 
executor or executors (in succession, in case more than one is named), by the 
appropriate High Court, with a copy of the will attached. One can apply for 
a probate any time after seven days of the death of the testator. 
6. Section 57 provides that a will is required to be probated from the competent court, 
subject to the exceptions contained therein. The property should be transferred on the 
basis of such probate to avoid any future litigation. A conjoint reading of sections 
213(1) and 57(1) establishes that a probate is mandatory in respect of a will made by 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 85
a Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, or Jain, residing within the limits of West Bengal, Bihar, 
Orissa, Assam, Madras, or Mumbai, or if any property is situate therein. 
Chapter 6
1. When two or more persons jointly own property they may hold it as 'tenants-incommon' or as ‘joint-tenants’. The share and interest of a tenant-in-common may be 
bequeathed, or in the absence of a will, such share and interest will pass, by 
succession, to the heirs of the deceased co-owner. However, in a joint tenancy, the 
co-owners/joint tenants hold a single unified interest in the property which cannot be 
bequeathed by will, or pass by succession (if there is no will). The interest of a 
deceased co-owner will only pass by survivorship to the surviving co-owner. 
2. The term ‘transmission’ is the process whereby units in mutual funds, held by a 
deceased, are transferred either to the surviving unitholder, or to a nominee, or to the 
legal heirs. Mutual fund units can be held as either solely or jointly (upto a maximum 
of three holders) and the mode of operation could be either or survivor; any or survivor 
or on joint basis. 
3. On the death of the sole holder, and in the absence of a nomination, the legal heir(s) 
of the deceased would have to approach the Depository Participant (DP) with the 
requisite documents for transmission of the shares. This would include a duly stamped 
affidavit executed by all the legal heirs, or by the identified legal heir if there is a 
probate, or succession certificate, or letters of administration, obtained. However, if the 
value of the shares per listed company does not exceed INR 200,000, a simple noobjection certificate is required from all legal heirs in favour of the claimant to such 
shares, or alternatively a family settlement executed and notarized by all legal heirs of 
the deceased, each of which must be submitted together with an indemnity bond. If 
there is a nomination made, the nominee would have to submit a transmission request 
form and attach a death certificate attested by a notary.
4. A nominee, may claim the proceeds of an insurance policy on the death of the 
policyholder. Section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938 provides that the policyholder who 
holds a policy of life insurance of his/her own life, may nominate the person or persons 
to whom the money secured by the policy shall be paid in the event of his/her death. 
Where a nomination is cancelled or altered by an endorsement, or a bequest is made 
under a will, a notice of a change in the nomination should be submitted to the insurer, 
as it is not liable for payments to the nominee registered in its records.
Chapter 7
1. Section 122 of TOPA defines a gift as a voluntary transfer of property from one person 
to another without compensation or any kind of consideration. A gift of immovable 
property having a value of INR 100 or more, has to be made by a registered instrument 
of gift executed by the donor and the donee and attested by two witnesses. The donee 
must accept the gift. No love and affection is necessary to make a gift, and all that is 
required is that it is voluntary and for no consideration or compensation.
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 86
2. The elements include the age of the property, the location of the property, the age and 
gender of the owner, the user of the property, the type of property and the amenities 
attached to the property.
3. A trust is created when there is an agreement between persons, under which property 
of one is held by another or others, for the benefit of a third party(ies), known as 
beneficiary(ies). The parties to a trust include, the author or settlor, trustee(s), and 
beneficiary(ies). A trust may also have a protector. 
4. Any person who is competent to contract, that is, of sound mind, having attained the 
age of majority and not being disqualified under law, may be a trustee.
5. A testamentary trust is created under a will, and comes into existence on the death of 
the maker of the will (testator). A non-testamentary trust is created during the lifetime 
of the settlor under an instrument (usually a trust deed).
6. In a revocable trust, the settlor retains control over the trust property, and may reassume ownership over the same. In an irrevocable trust the settlor cedes control and 
ownership over the trust property. 
7. A business succession plan, which may include the creation of a trust, will attempt to 
achieve sustainability, continuity and a seamless transfer of control and management. 
Coupled with such plan, a private family trust can be created to: (i) hold ownership of 
the business, (ii) provide for the beneficial interest/share of each family member, (iii) 
regulate and oversee management of the business, (iv) provide for distributions to 
family members of income arising out of the business, (v) provide a demarcation 
between beneficiaries personal and professional responsibilities, and (vi) generally 
improve governance.
8. Disputes over IPR of a family business are not unusual after the death of a founder or 
owner, and/or when there is a split in family businesses. Trust ownership of IPR is 
efficient, and can enable apportionment of royalties between its beneficiaries and 
manage and control the use and enjoyment of the IPR, including non-compete 
agreements and concurrent use of IPR, whether for the same, or for different classes 
of, goods and services.
9. An offshore trust is a trust formed outside India by an Indian resident and is governed 
by Indian foreign laws and tax laws, in addition to the laws of the resident jurisdiction. 
Indian law permits an Indian resident to hold, own, transfer or invest in foreign 
currency, security and also immovable property outside India if such assets were 
owned, held or acquired by him while he was resident outside India or if he has 
inherited property from a person resident outside India. An Indian resident can, without 
RBI approval, also fund an offshore trust through the Liberalised Remittance Scheme 
(LRS), which permits investment abroad upto USD 250,000 per person per financial 
year. 
10. Each family arrangement or settlement will have its own objectives and requirements 
and therefore the instruments employed will depend upon these factors. Typically, any 
one or more of the following instruments may be employed: (a). a memorandum or an 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 87
agreement of family arrangement; (b). instruments of gift; (c). instruments creating a 
private trust; (d). instruments of sale and transfer; (e). an instrument setting out a 
business succession plan, management goals, expansion, etc.; (f). wills; and, (g). a 
memorandum or recording of the family arrangement or settlement. 
Disclaimer 
This module is intended to provide a general overview and understanding of certain 
provisions of law, and other legal principles, as referred herein, as they stood on the date this 
module was written. All laws and legal principles are subject to amendment and change at 
any time, and therefore the provisions of law and legal principles referred herein are also 
subject to change. This module is not intended to, and does not, provide legal instruction or 
advise, or induce, or encourage the reader to impart any legal instruction or advise to any 
persons. Any persons who reads this module, including financial planners, financial advisors, 
estate planners, professionals, and students, unless otherwise separately qualified to practice 
law in their jurisdiction and of good standing, must not impart or attempt to impart any legal 
advice or consultancy, to any persons, and should request such persons to consult a qualified 
lawyer of good standing. 
Copyright © 2020, Financial Planning Standards Board Ltd. All rights reserved. 88.
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 1
 
FPSB
Risk & Estate 
Planning Specialist 
(Work Book)
Financial Planning Academy
1st floor, Dharmakshetra II, Shimpoli Road, Borivali (W), Mumbai - 400092. 
admincfp@fpa.edu.in | +91-9867556661
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 2
Content developed by Financial Planning Academy 
Copyright © owned by Financial Planning Academy
.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise or stored in a database or 
retrieval system without the prior written permission of the copyright owner.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 3
*Must Read*
• Check Your Mails for
1. Recap of every lecture
2. Time table or change of schedule
3. Placements
4. Lecture Feedback links
 Online Portals (Login details sent on your Email Id)
1. Videos
2. iLearn
a. Modules (Theory Notes)
b. Mock test
c. Library (Important Documents)
 For any help on the following, contact us at admincfp@fpa.edu.in or call on 
8433999326/9867556661:
1. Change in contact details
2. Next module information
3. Re-attend any module
4. Centre change
5. FPSB Registration process
6. Suggestions and grievances
 For any syllabus related query or doubt solving sessions contact us at solvecfp@fpa.edu.in or 
call on 9833998442
• Exam Preparation
1. FPSB Study Material
2. Class sheet
3. Importance through Email
4. Workbook
5. iLearn
*Contact admin at admincfp@fpa.edu.in for joining telegram group to receive any updates 
regarding your coursework*
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 4
CONTENTS
RISK PLANNINGSPECIALIST NUMERSICAL SHEET 5
RISK PLANNING SPECIALIST NUMERICAL SHEET SOLUTIONS 9
RISK PLANNINGSPECIALIST PRACTICE QUESTIONS 17
RISK MANAGEMENT (INDIA) MCQ QUESTIONS 31
RISK MANAGEMENT (GLOBAL) MCQ QUESTIONS 45
ADDITIONAL MCQQUESTIONS OF RISK MANAGEMENT 59
ESTATE PLANNINGSPECIALIST MCQ QUESTIONS- (INDIA) 69
ESTATE PLANNINGSPECIALIST MCQ QUESTIONS – (GLOBAL) 82
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 5
RISK PLANNING SPECIALIST 
NUMERICAL SHEET
1) Mr. Mahesh, age 30, is suffering from cancer. The doctors have lost all hope & his death is certain. 
Mr. Mahesh reaches out to his friend, Mr. Suresh, who is an insurance agent, asking to buy an 
insurance policy worth Rs. 10 Cr. Mr. Mahesh is financially sound & can easily afford the premiums 
towards the policy. Should an insurance policy be offered to Mr. Mahesh by the insurance company?
2) Ms. Sonam is very close to her mother & would like to cover her motherly love & affection. BCCI 
are very impressed by the way M S Dhoni has captained the Indian side. In a short span of time, he 
has gone on to be the best captain of India ever. BCCI would like to buy an insurance policy covering
his leadership skills. Sonam & BCCI have approached LIC asking them to help them with an insurance 
cover. Would it be possible for LIC to offer them an insurance policy?
3) Jay, age 24, is a trader & trades regularly in the stock & commodities market. He has been a very 
active trader & has made a considerable amount of income through executing trades. Off late, he is 
making losses & is keen to minimize his losses as much as he can. Rohan, his friend & an insurance 
advisor has suggested him to buy an insurance policy to cover the losses he may incur in trading. 
Would Jay be able to buy an insurance policy to cover his losses?
4) Mr. Gada has taken a life insurance policy covering him for death. He has taken an insurance cover 
for Rs. 10 Crore & has been paying the premiums regularly. While traveling to New Jersey, he was 
caught in an earthquake, where he lost his life. His family has put across a claim with the insurance 
company for Rs. 10 Crore. Will the claim amount be sanctioned?
5) Mr. Gada has taken a property insurance policy covering his property for damage & destruction. 
He has taken an insurance cover for Rs. 10 Crore& has been paying the premiums regularly. While 
traveling to New Jersey, he came to know that, there has been a massive earthquake at his home town, 
damaging his property. He has put across a claim with the insurance company for Rs. 10 Crore. Will 
the claim amount be sanctioned?
6) Mr. Himanshu is a businessman and has wants to know if he could insure his business which is 
affected due to the following uncertain activities
1. Inflation
2. Political upheavals
3. Technological changes
4. Fire, theft & misappropriation
7) If Mr. Rahul the owner of the house which is valued at Rs. 15,00,000 insured the house for Rs. 
4,00,000 against fire and the house was subsequently destroyed by fire. What would be the amount 
that Mr. Rahul would recover?
8) If a solid gold pendent is valued at Rs. 2,00,000 and is insured by the insurer for this amount, two 
years ago and was subsequently stolen. Also, the current value of the item could be as high as Rs. 
3,00,000 because of the substantial appreciation in the value of gold over the two years. What would 
be the amount recovered from the insurer for the same?
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 6
9) Mr. Gandhi, has taken 2 Mediclaim policies covering the same peril. Policy A (issued by XYZ 
Insurance company) is worth Rs. 300,000 while Policy B (issued by PQR insurance company) is worth 
Rs. 200,000. He incurs a heart attack & is immediately hospitalized. The total cost of hospitalization 
comes to around Rs. 150,000. Mr. Gandhi approaches you, a qualified financial planner, inquiring if 
he could raise a claim request (of Rs. 150,000) to both the companies (i.e. company XYZ & PQR). 
What would you suggest?
10) Mr. Jay’s car was hit by a vehicle, which was being driven by Ms. Unnati. Mr. Jay reached out to 
his employer ICICI Lombard to make good the losses (say Rs. 7,000). ICICI Lombard, paid the claim 
amount raised to Mr.Jay in fullsettlement. Mr. Jay now decides to sue Ms. Unnati too for the damages. 
What is the amount that Ms. Unnati would pay to Mr. Jay?
11) Ms. Mehta, age 30, is planning to take a life insurance policy. She has a family medical history of 
high diabetes. Ms. Mehta takes a life insurance policy worth Rs. 2 crores. She doesn’t disclose the 
same to Max Life Insurance while taking the term insurance policy. The insurance premium calculated 
by the company is with regards to a normal healthy individual. She pays the premium regularly. One 
fine day, she meets with an accident, wherein she loses a lot of blood & the doctors couldn’t operate 
her because she was a high diabetic & they had to bring it in control before they could take things 
forward. Ms. Mehta passed away because of the same. What should Max Life Insurance do?
12) Mr. Mehta, age 35, stays in a bungalow at Navsari, Gujarat. His bungalow is next to Mr. Shah’s 
who is out most of the times & has left the keys for safekeeping of the bungalow with Mr. Mehta. Mr. 
Mehta fears that, there is a possibility that Mr. Shah’s bungalow may catch fire due to short circuit or 
otherwise, because of which his bungalow may be caught in fire too. He gets in touch with ICICI 
Lombard asking them if he can insure the bungalow of Mr. Shah.
13) Mr. Patil had insured his house, against fire, with HDFC Ergo General Insurance covering his 
house for a sum of Rs. 2 Crore on 16th Jan, 2012. The house caught fire on 23rd July, 2012. While 
trying to arrest the spread of the fire, the officers of the fire brigade department, took up some furniture 
& threw it down from the house. While raising a claim with HDFC, Mr. Patil claimed the damage to 
the furniture too (which was thrown down from the house). What would be the stand of the insurer?
14) Ms. Jiah Khan, aged 30, has taken a term insurance policy on 12th Feb, 2013 from her agent Mr. 
Suraj Pancholi. The sum insured was Rs. 15 Cr. Ms. Khan committed suicide on 16th Nov, 2013. The 
nominee of Ms. Khan puts across a claim request with Mr. Suraj Pancholi for the sum insured. Mr. 
Suraj promises that the insurance company would repay the promised sum insured. As a financial 
planner, do you agree with the advice given across by Mr. Suraj?
15) Mr. Suhas (30) had taken a life insurance policy in the name of his wife Ms. Suhas (25) on 1st 
Jan, 2013 for a sum of Rs. 500,000 from LIC. Ms. Suhas died a sudden death on 2nd Feb, 2015. Mr. 
Suhas who was the policyholder, requested for the claim amount. On further investigation by the 
police, it was found out that, Ms. Suhas was murdered by her husband only to claim the policy money 
to pay of his debts. Will LIC settle the claim amount?
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 7
16) A house owned by Mr. Nikhil is listed for sale for Rs 30,00,000 is destroyed by the wind storm & 
the current value of the land on which the house has been built is Rs, 10,67,000. What would be the 
amount of loss covered under the insurance?
17) If Mrs. Ritz purchased a car for Rs. 2,50,000 & the car is insured for Rs. 3,00,000. What would 
be the amount recovered from the Insurer in case of an accident?
18) Mr. B owns a house that is worth Rs. 45,50,000 & the amount of insurance cover taken is Rs. 
25,00,000 & the property suffers a damage of Rs. 15,00,000 with no deductible. What would be the 
amount paid by the Insurer due to coinsurance penalty?
19) Mr. Pradeep owns a house which is valued at Rs. 30,00,000 & is insured only for Rs. 20,00,000 
(67% of the value). If the house suffered a damage of Rs. 12,00,000. What would be the amount of 
claim received for the house to Mr. Pradeep?
20) Mr. Krishna has 25 years left for the retirement. He earns Rs. 5,00,000 p.a. His Personal living 
expenses, insurance premiums & taxes are equivalent to Rs. 2,20,000. Discount rate for the same has 
been assumed as 4% p.a. Use the Income based, human life value approach to determine a life 
insurance need.
21) Mr. & Ms. Sharma aged 50 & 47; both have life expectancy of 35 years. Calculate the insurance 
required based on Need Based Approach for Mr. Sharma. You’ve the following information:
Current Investments = Rs. 25,00,000
Expenses = Rs. 3,00,000 (including Rs. 1,00,000 of Mr. Sharma’s personal expenses) 
Mr. Sharma’s income post-tax = Rs. 3,00,000
Final Costs = Rs. 1,00,000
Inflation rate = 5% p.a. Return on investments = 8% p.a.
22) 45-year-old client named Anna wishes to replace Rs. 5,50,000 of her Rs. 8,50,000 annual income 
for her spouse benefit, upon her death. Here, the client expects this salary to increase 3 percent per 
year and she plans to live to age 90. And also, conservative interest rate is considered as 6% p.a.
23) 35-Year-old client named Ravi wishes to replace Rs. 6,70,000 of his Rs. 8,00,000 annual income 
for his spouse benefit, upon his death. With the rate of interest as 6% p.a. & increase in salary at 3%
p.a. Find the amount needed by the Capital Retention Method?
24) Faber Case
Frederick and Frieda Faber are working through the steps in a life-needs analysis. Frieda is a stay-athome mother, taking care of the couple’s two children. The Faber’s have decided they would like 
Frieda to continue staying at home until the children leave home. The couple has reached the place in
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 8
their calculations where they need to decide how much income would be required to provide adequate 
income to care for the two children: Eva, age 10 and Emma, age 8, until each child reaches age 18.
Step one is determining the amount of cash inflow required to sustain a desirable lifestyle for Frieda, 
Eva and Emma. This process involves looking at the budget, backing out expenses directly related to 
Frederick, and settling on the appropriate amount. Calculations would need to factor an acceptable 
inflation rate so purchasing power would remain relatively constant. We will also need to agree to a 
discount rate (i.e., return on savings/investments). For our purposes, let’s settle on the following:
 Annual income needed with Frieda and both girls at home: Rs. 150000
 Annual income needed with Frieda and Emma at home: Rs. 108750
 Inflation rate: 3.5 percent
 Discount rate: 5.0 percent
 Years remaining at home
 Eva: 10
 Emma: 8
25) Mr. Sharma is 30 years old & plans to retire at the age of 60. He is employed as the Vice President 
(Operations) with Global Cosmetic Ltd at an annual remuneration of Rs. 9,50,000, which is increasing 
by 5% p.a. His annual expenses are as follows: -
Personal expenses are to the tune of Rs. 1,50,000. 
Life insurance premium, for self, is Rs. 18,000.
Life insurance premium of Rs. 10,500 & Rs. 6,500 p.a. for his wife & child respectively. 
Professional tax of Rs. 3,000 &
Income tax, subject to allowable deductions of Rs. 1,32,000
The rate of interest assumed for capitalization of future income is 8%. Calculate the amount of 
insurance cover, required by Mr. Sharma, using Human Live Value (HLV) approach.
26) Mr. Deep aged 30 years has one child who is currently 5 years old and will be in college for four 
years, beginning at age 18. A year of college expenses totals to Rs. 2,50,000, inflation for college 
costs is 6% p.a. and our client, Mr. Rahul can earn 7% p.a. on their investments. Find the insurance 
cover required today to meet this education goal?
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 9
1) Solution:
RISK PLANNING SPECIALIST 
NUMERICAL SHEET SOLUTIONS
“Risk” is defined as a possibility that the actual outcome may differ from the expected outcome. The 
word “possibility” here, signifies, “uncertainty”. So, insurance can be offered only when there is an 
uncertainty in the outcome of an event. Here, Mahesh is suffering from cancer & his death is 
“inevitable - i.e. certain”. So, offering him insurance wouldn’t be feasible.
Kindly note that, although “death” is a certain outcome for all of us, insurance basically covers the 
“timing” of death. The moment, the timing is certain, the concerned individual loses out on his option 
to protect him through insurance.
1. Solution:
Insurance covers “financial risks” (i.e. risks which can be quantified in terms of money) but it cannot 
issue an insurance policy to cover any risk which cannot be quantified in financial terms. Both the 
risks stated above (“love & affection” & “leadership qualities”) are “non-financial risks” & so cannot 
be insured.
2. Solution:
Insurance only covers “pure risks” (i.e. pure risks have only two possible outcomes - either a loss or 
no loss, but never ever a possibility of gain). Jay is into buying & selling of shares (i.e. speculative 
activity). Insurance doesn’t cover speculative activities. If insurance started covering speculative 
activities then everybody will try to profit out of insurance - thus defeating the whole objective and 
purpose of insurance.
3. Solution:
Life insurance covers death caused due to any means. Even if death has been caused on account of a 
natural disaster & if the insured has been paying premiums regularly, the same would be covered 
under life insurance. (However, if Mr. Gada is staying in area which is prone to earthquakes or has 
earthquakes more often, and say he applies for a life insurance cover, then the insurance company 
may either: -
1. Specifically exclude death on occasion of an earthquake or
2. Include death on occasion of an earthquake but with an increase in premiums or
3. Reject his request for life insurance completely).
4. Solution:
Unless otherwise stated in the policy, damage/destruction caused to property on account of any natural 
disaster is specifically excluded under general insurance (Key: - The movie, “Oh my god”)
5. Solution:
Insurance covers only “particular risks & static risks” (i.e. risks which affect only individuals & not 
the whole population). It doesn’t cover “dynamic & fundamental risks” (i.e. risks which occur due to 
changes in economy or which affect large section of the population). Fire, theft & misappropriation
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 10
are particular risks & so would be covered under insurance. While inflation, political upheavals & 
technological changes are fundamental & dynamic risks & thus cannot be covered under insurance.
6. Solution:
The insured would only be able to recover Rs. 400,000, even if the property is actually worth Rs. 
15,00,000. If the insured was able to recover Rs. 15,00,000 and so make a profit out of insurance, this 
would constitute a wager (i.e., speculation), which would be against the true nature of insurance.
7. Solution:
The insurance would only pay the agreed value of Rs 2,00,000 & not Rs 3,00,000. Furthermore, the 
insurer would still pay Rs. 2,00,000 even if the value of the item actually declined to Rs 1,00,000.
8. Solution:
In this case the second policy would be hit by the “Principle of Contribution”. Raising a request 
with both the companies means he is paid twice for a single claim, thus the claimant would end up 
profiting from insurance.
If an insured person has coverage under two indemnity insurance policies, he has the right to choose 
under which policy he wants to make the claim. If the claimed amount us higher than the sum insured 
under the policy on which he has first made the claim, the insured person can claim the balance amount 
from the second indemnity policy.
9. Solution:
As per the “Principle of Subrogation”, once the claim amount is settled, the insurer steps into the 
shoes of the insured (i.e. in this case, ICICI Lombard, will step into the shoes of Mr. Jay) & is entitled 
to recover from the defaulting party a sum (to the extent paid to the insured). The principle of 
subrogation thus stops the insured from profiting out of insurance. Unnati will not pay anything to 
Jay.
10. Solution:
Ms. Mehta was suffering from high diabetes at the time of death. Moreover, she didn’t disclose her 
family history of diabetes at the time of taking the policy. In this case, she has breached the “principle 
of utmost good faith” & Max Life insurance can repudiate the claim on this ground. The claim has 
now become voidable at the option of Max Life Insurance.
11. Solution:
As per the principle of “insurable interest”, there has to be a financial interest in the subject matter 
to be insured, i.e. Mr. Mehta should incur a financial loss if Mr. Shah’s bungalow gets burnt down by 
fire. Since, Mr. Mehta won’t incur a financial loss if Mr. Shah’s bungalow gets burnt down by fire (he 
would incur a loss only if the fire is spread to his bungalow), Mr. Mehta won’t be eligible to buy 
insurance on Mr. Shah’s bungalow.
12. Solution:
As per the “principle of proximate cause” - the initial event in the chain of events that caused the 
loss needs to be looked at while accepting claim settlement requests. The rule is that for the loss to be 
paid or compensated under an insurance policy, it must have been caused by an insured peril. Unless
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 11
the loss is proximately caused by an insured peril, the policy doesn’t pay or respond. In this case, the 
furniture was thrown out of the house to arrest the spreading of the fire. Mr. Patil had taken an 
insurance policy against fire. Since, fire is an insured peril, the loss of damage of furniture gets 
covered.
13. Solution:
-In this case, the “suicide clause” has automatically been triggered. The suicide clause gets triggered, 
if the insured commits suicide within 1 year of taking the life insurance policy. If the policyholder 
commits suicide within 1 year, his family will not be able to avail the benefit of getting the sum 
assured.
14. Solution:
LIC won’t settle the claim as insurance cannot be taken for an illegal objective.
15. Solution:
The current value of the house would be the sale price less the value of the land (land is not covered
by insurance), assuming the sale price was not overinflated. Therefore, the amount covered would be 
Rs. 19,33,000.
Note: In accident policies the economic loss sustained by the insured is calculated by referring to
lost income, medical bills, set amounts detailed in the policy for specified injuries or sicknesses and, 
in the case of residual injuries, the levels of damages awarded by the courts.
16. Solution:
If a car is purchased for Rs. 2,50,000 and insured for Rs. 3,00,000 an insurer would be required to 
only pay Rs. 2,50,000 and be prevented from voiding the policy.
17. Solution:
Amount Paid by the Insurer will be = 25,00,000/45,50,000 * 15,00,000
= Rs. 824175.8242
Therefore, the amount paid by the Insurer would be Rs. 8,24,176.
18. Solution:
If the house suffered damage of Rs. 12,00,000 
12,00,000 * 67% = Rs. 8,04,000
Therefore, the amount of claim received for house to Mr. Pradeep will be Rs. 8,04,000.
19. Solution:
Set Begin
N 25
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 12
I 4%
PV ? 4549149.68
PMT 280000(500000-220000)
FV 0
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
20. Solution:
Particulars Amount
Immediate expenses (i.e., final costs) 1,00,000
+ PV (Net Ongoing Expenses) (WN1) 45,13,873.13
- Available assets (i.e., current investments) -25,00,000
Insurance Required as per NBA 21,13,873.126
PV of Net Ongoing Expenses
Particulars Amount
Set Begin
N (i.e., life expectancy of surviving spouse) 35
I% 2.857142857
PV ? 45,13,873.126
PMT 2,00,000 ( 3 Lakhs - 1 Lakh)
FV, P/Y, C/y 0,1,1
21. Solution:
Particulars Amount
Set Begin
N 45
I% 2.916 (6% & 3%)
PV ? ₹ -1,40,94,351.11
PMT 550000
FV, P/Y, C/y 0,1,1
22. Solution:
Capital Retention Approach = Annual Income / Rate of Return
= 6,70,000/2.9126% = Rs. 23003502
23. Solution:
Here Real Rate of Return = (1+5%)/(1+3.5%)-1 = 1.44927%
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 13
PV of Annual Income needed with Frieda and both girls at home:
Set Begin
N 8
I 1.44928%
PV ? 1141684.021
PMT -150000
FV 0
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
Now that we know the amount required to fund the income stream while both girls are at home, we 
can move on to calculate the amount needed to fund the additional two years when Frieda and Emma 
remain in the home.
FV of Rs. 108750 after 8 years using the inflation rate as 3.5% p.a.
Set Begin
N 8
I 3.5%
PV -108750
PMT 0
FV ₹ 1,43,202.98
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
Now, calculate the sum needed to fund the remaining two years of income while Emma is at home
Set Begin
N 2
I 1.449275%
PV ? 284360.2086
PMT 143202.9828
FV 0
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
We want to find out how much will be needed today to fund the future need, so we discount back to 
today
Set Begin
N 8
I 5%
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 14
PV ? 192466.1822
PMT
FV 284360.2086
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
By adding the two amounts: 1141684.021 + 192466.1822 = Rs. 1334150.203
If no liquid assets or existing insurance is available, Rs. 1334150 is the amount of life insurance 
the Frederick’s would need to fund this future income stream.
If we were doing a full life-insurance needs calculation, we would move forward to determine 
amounts needed to fund Frieda’s pre-retirement and retirement-period income (based on what
the couple decides that amount should be). If the Faber’s want to fund all or part of their 
daughter’s university tuition, we would also work through the amount necessary for that need. 
The result, after adding all the amounts, is likely to be quite large. This would be true in many 
situations, and is one reason why term life insurance is often best for providing the necessary 
death benefit at the most cost-effective (and non-budget busting) premium. In the case of the 
Faber’s, we would probably recommend a 10-year level-term life insurance policy to fund the 
need while Eva and Emma remain at home.
It may be that a different type of life insurance would make more sense for Frieda’s preretirement or retirement need, but we would need more information to make that 
determination. We would need to know about available discretionary income, balanced by the 
need for other investment funding. Also, we would need to find out whether Frieda would be 
working outside the home after the girls leave, and if so, what impact that would have on her 
retirement-funding needs. Finally, whether from investments or other sources, we need to 
determine Frieda’s net financial need during both the pre-retirement and retirement periods. 
We will not work through these calculations, but you should recognize this as another example 
of the holistic, inter-related nature of financial advice.
The proper method to assess risk exposures is to conduct a step-by-step audit. If an advisor does 
a complete risk management plan, he or she would assess each of the risk exposure areas. In 
some cases, the client may desire a more focused approach, and the advisor should adapt 
accordingly. As an example, the client may have already addressed all healthcare related risk 
exposures, and does not want to include that area in a broader risk-assessment audit. At the 
same time, an advisor should not assume that any area has already been addressed. It’s best to 
assess all potential areas of need and let the client advise otherwise if appropriate.
24. Solution:
Human Life Value (HLV) is calculated as = PV (Net Annual Income Lost) 
Calculation of Net Annual Income
Calculation of Net Annual Income Amount (Rs.)
Gross Annual Income 9,50,000
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 15
(-) Personal Taxes -1,50,000
(-) Taxes (professional tax + income tax) -1,35,000
(-) premium paid for self -18,000
Net Annual Income 6,47,000
Particulars Explanation Amount (In 
Rs.)
Set Money will be received immediately when a person passes away Begin
N No. of years left to retirement 30
I Discounting factor (real rate of return) 2.857143%
PV We have to solve PV (i.e., the amount of insurance required) ? 
(1,32,88,013)
PMT Net Annual Income that is lost (as calculated above) 6,47,000
FV, P/Y,
C/Y
Future Value, No. of annual payments & No. of annual 
compounding 0,1,1
Note: Any life insurance premiums paid, for any member of one’s family, other than self, should not 
be deducted from the Gross Annual Income.
25. Solution:
Find the FV of Expenses Required at the age of 18 years
SET Begin
N 13
I 6%
PV -250000
PMT 0
FV ₹ 5,33,232.07
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
Amount (PV) required at child’s age of 18 years
SET Begin
N 4
I 0.943%
PV ? ₹ -21,03,213.26
PMT ₹ 5,33,232.07
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 16
FV 0
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
Insurance Cover Required today (Discounting @ 7% p.a.)
SET Begin
N 13
I 7%
PV ? -₹ 8,72,758.73
PMT 0
FV ₹ 21,03,213.26
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 17
Wno. 1: Cost of higher education 
after 15 years
SET Begin
N 15
I % 5%
PV -70,00,000
PMT 0
FV ₹ 1,45,52,497.26
P/Y & C/Y 1
WNo. 2: Amount to be received today 
to achieve the education cost after 15 
years
SET Begin
N 15
I % 8%
PV -45,87,554
PMT 0
FV ₹ 1,45,52,497.26
P/Y & C/Y 1
RISK PLANNING SPECIALIST 
PRACTICE QUESTIONS
1) Your client aged 32 years old & has Rs. 35, 00,000 in loan liabilities. He has a non- working
spouse of age 30 & children of age 7 years & 5 years. Additionally, the client wants higher education
for each of his children to the tune of Rs. 35, 00,000 after 15 years & marriage expenses of Rs.
25,00,000 after 20 years (both are considered at current costs). The present household expenses are 
Rs. 55,000 per month, which includes housing loan EMI of Rs. 15,000. The client consumes Rs
13,000 per month as personal expenses. He also wants to provide for 50 years living expenses for his 
spouse. He has an insurance cover of Rs. 45, 00,000 presently & his financial investments are Rs. 
25,00,000. The additional quantum of life insurance is (Assume all expenses required are 
inflation adjusted at an average inflation of 5% p.a. & the claim amount is invested to yield is 8% p.a.)
Solution:
Amount of additional insurance required
Particulars Amount (in Rs.)
PV (Loan) (given) ₹ 35,00,000.00
(+) PV (higher education for both children) (WN 1 & 2) ₹ 45,87,554.00
(+) PV (marriage expenses) (WN 3 & 4) ₹ 28,46,301.00
(+) PV (living expenses for spouse) (WN 5 & 6) ₹ 86,99,400.52
(-) Insurance cover already taken (given) - ₹ 45,00,000.00
(-) Available investments (given) - ₹ 25,00,000.00
Additional Insurance cover required ₹ 1,26,33,255.52
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 18
Wno. 3 : Cost of Marriage expenses 
after 20 years
SET Begin
N 20
I % 5%
PV -50,00,000
PMT 0
FV ₹ 1,32,66,488.53
P/Y & C/Y 1
Wno. 4: Amount to be invested today 
to achieve the cost of marriage after 
20 years
SET Begin
N 20
I % 8%
PV -28,46,301.33
PMT 0
FV ₹ 1,32,66,488.53
P/Y & C/Y 1
Wno. 5 : Net Household expenses per month
Particulars Amount 
Rs.)
(in
Present Household Expenses ₹ 55,000.00
(-) EMI
separately)
(loan amount shown ₹ -15,000.00
(-) Personal Expenses ₹ -13000.00
Net Household Expense ₹ 33,000.00
Wno. 6 : PV of living Expenses
Particulars Amount (in 
Rs.)
SET Begin
N 600
I% = rrr = ((1.08/1.05)-
1)*100 2.857142857
PV ? 
8699400.523
PMT -27000
FV,P/Y,C/Y 0,12,1 (resp)
2) How much would an insurance policy reimburse a homeowner who has a house valued at R. 
40,00,000 insured for Rs. 30,00,000 after experiencing a fire that causes Rs. 2,00,000 in damage? The 
house has an 80 percent coinsurance provision and a Rs. 10,000 deductible.
Solution:
Insurance would reimburse the homeowner Rs. 1,77,500 as a result of the coinsurance penalty for 
being underinsured. Required insurance is 80 percent of replacement value or Rs. 32,00,000, and the 
house is insured for 93.75 percent of the required amount. To determine the amount that will be 
reimbursed, divide Rs. 30,00,000 by Rs. 32,00,000 and multiply the loss amount by the result, then 
subtract the deductible: Rs. 30,00,000 / 32,00,000 = .93.75 x Rs. 2,00,000 = Rs. 1,87,500 – Rs. 10,000
= Rs. 1,77,500.
3) Mr. Kelkar owns a flat worth (market value) Rs. 20,00,000 in the outskirts of Mumbai. He had 
insured it only for Rs. 16,00,000. The flat is damaged by an earthquake (he had requested cover from 
natural & manmade disasters too), which loss is assessed at Rs. 4,00,000. How much claim payment 
Mr. Kelkar will get?
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 19
Solution:
As per the “principles of average”, the claim amount that is payable to Mr. Kelkar would be as follows: 
Amount payable by the insurance company = (Sum insured/ Market Value) * Loss
= (16,00,000/ 20,00,000) * 4,00,000 
 Therefore, claim payable = Rs. 3,20,000.
The objective of the “principle of average” is that, if there is an underinsurance, the insured is 
considered to be his own insurer to the extent of the underinsurance. This means, the insured will
bear part of the loss as a penalty for underinsurance.
4) A couple with no dependants and age 60 years (male) and 58 years (female) has a corpus of Rs. 1 
crore. Their expectancy to live is 80 years (male) and 83 years (female). Following are the annuity 
options: (1) Guarantee period of annuity of Rs. 9.43 Lakhs p.a. for 20 years. (2) Rs. 8.37 Lakhs p.a. 
as joint life annuity for 25 years 3) Rs. 7.28 Lakhs p.a. as joint life annuity for 25 years with return of 
purchase price.
a) Option 1, as it gives highest returns.
b) Option 2, as it covers wife’s life expectancy.
c) Option 1, as it gives higher annuity for husband.
d) Option 3, as the corpus comes backs and return is high.
Solution:
Option A gives return of 
7.998
Option B gives return of 
7.53
Option C gives return of 
7.8515
SET =Begin SET =Begin SET =Begin
N= 20 N= 25 N= 25
I= Solve (7.998) I= Solve (7.53) I= Solve (7.8515)
PV= -10000000 PV= -10000000 PV= -10000000
PMT= 943000 PMT= 837000 PMT= 728000
FV=0 FV=0 FV=10000000
P/Y=1 P/Y=1 P/Y=1
C/Y=1 C/Y=1 C/Y=1
5) How much life insurance must an individual purchase today to fully fund college education costs 
for a 10-year-old child who will enter a four-year university program at age 18? Assume current 
first-year expenses of Rs. 2,00,000, five percent tuition inflation and a seven percent discount rate, 
with all funds available at the beginning of college.
Investment Rate 7% and Inflation Rate 5%
Solution:
Find the FV of Expenses Required at the age of 18 years
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 20
SET Begin
N 18-10 = 8
I 5%
PV -200000
PMT 0
FV ₹ 295491.0888
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
Amount (PV) required at child’s age of 18 years
SET Begin
N 4
I 1.90476 (7% & 5%)
PV ? ₹ - 1149236.187
PMT ₹ 295491.0888
FV 0
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
Insurance Cover Required today (Discounting @ 7% p.a.)
SET Begin
N 8
I 7%
PV ? -₹ 668865.9243
PMT 0
FV ₹ 1149236.187
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
6) A Property is insured with insurer A for Rs.200,000 and insurer B for Rs.100,000 respectively 
subject to pro rata average. If the loss reported is Rs.30,000, then as per principle of contribution how 
much will insurer A pay?
a. 30,000
b. 20,000
c. 10,000
d. 15,000
Solution:
Particulars Insured Value Ratio Amount of Claim
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 21
Insurer A 2,00,000 66.67% (2,00,000 /3,00,000) 20000 (30,000*66.67%)
Insurer B 1,00,000 33.33% (1,00,000/3,00,000) 10000 (30,000*33.33%)
Total 3,00,000 100% 30,000
7) A person requires Rs.50,000 per annum for the 15 years after retirement, which is still 10 years 
away. With a discount rate of 5% the need for the insurance based on this parameter is
a. Rs.245,675
b. Rs.334,541
c. Rs.456,376
d. Rs.567,645
Solution:
SET Begin Begin
N 15 10
I 5 5
PV ? 544932 ? 334541
PMT -50000 0
FV 544932
P/Y 1 1
C/Y 1 1
8) Amit born in 1950 has a life expectancy at birth of 65 years. Rajul his wife born in 1955 has a 
life expectancy at birth of 70 years. Assuming that the life expectancies have not changed, Amit is 
planning to buy an annuity to be paid to him or his wife till anyone of them is alive. Amit will retire 
on attaining age 58 i.e. in 2008.
a. 4 years
b. 12 years
c. 7 years
d. 17 years
Solution:
In case of joint life annuity, consider the ages of younger partner. 
1955+70=2025
2025-2008=17 years
9) Calculate the HLV to recommend additional insurance cover for Mr. Rahate. His present age is 45 
years, retirement age is 70 years, total income is Rs.21,00,000 [salaries: 15 lakhs, dividends on 
individualshares: 2.5 lakhs, HUF co-parcener’s share of profit: 1.5 lakhs, interest on bank deposit and
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 22
other investment: 1 lakh, minor daughters’ income (clubbed): 1 lakh]. He has paid corporate 
professional tax: Rs.5,000 and income tax (as per individual tax return filed): Rs.410,000. He pays 
total life insurance premium of Rs.55,000 (self-insurance cover: Rs.22,00,000). Reasonable 
maintenance charges for a person of his stature is assumed as Rs.100,000p.a. Assumed rate of interest 
to arrive at a present value of his future income is 5 %.
a. Rs.1.16 crores
b. Rs.3 crores
c. Rs.1.80 crores
d. Rs.12 crores.
Solution:
SET Begin
N 25
I 5
PV ? 13762737
PMT -9,30,000 (1500000-5000-410000-55000-100000)
FV 0
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
1,37,62,737-22,00,000=1,15,62,737
10) Your client earns Rs. 60,000 annually. She is married and has a child aged 3. If she should die, 
she wants her family to receive Rs.45,000 annually for the next 20 years, with the first payment due 
on her death, and to provide Rs.120,000 for her child’s college education in fifteen years’ time. She 
also wants to set up a final expense fund of Rs.15,000, and pay off the mortgage, automobile loan, 
and outstanding credit card balances. Extracts of her personal balance sheet are as follows:
Assets (Total = 590,000)
 Condominium (For Investment Purpose) : 210,000
 Personal Property: 50,000
 Automobile: 40,000
 Mutual Funds: 50,000
 Bank Deposits: 10,000
 Life Insurance: 100,000
 Mortgage Reducing Term Assurance: 100,000
 Group Death Benefit: 30,000
 Liabilities (Total 120,000)
 Automobile Loan: 15,000
 Mortgage: 100,000
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 23
 Credit Card Balance: 5,000
Assuming that the life insurance proceeds and liquid funds can earn 6% annually, calculate the 
additional Insurance cover required?
a. 500,246
b. 516,146
c. 547,115
d. 232,187
Solution:
Calculation of PV of Expenses
SET Begin
N 20
I 6
PV ? 547115
PMT -45000
FV 0
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
Calculation of PV of Child’s Education
SET Begin
N 15
I 6
PV ? 50072
PMT 0
FV 120000
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
Amount of cover required as per need-based method
Particulars Amount (in Rs.)
1. PV of Expenses ₹ 5,47,115.00
2. PV of Child's Education ₹ 50,072.00
3. Final Expenses Fund ₹ 15,000.00
4. Total of all needs (1+2+3) ₹ 6,12,187.00
Add Liabilities (15000+ 100000+ 5000) +₹ 1,20,000.00
Less Financial Assets (210000+ 50000+ 10000) -₹ 2,70,000.00
Less Existing Insurance (100000+100000+ 30000) -₹ 2,30,000.00
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 24
Insurance Required ₹ 2,32,187.00
11) Personal Data of Mr. Vikram:
Earnings: Rs 2,00,000 p.a. 
Debts: Rs. 1,00,000
Total Expenses: Rs. 1,28, 572
To support dependent’s 75% of pre -death salary (assume no debts to be considered) Assuming simple 
interest of 7% p.a., as a Financial Planner find out the insurance required using the Capital Retention 
Approach
a) Rs.24,42,000
b) Rs.22,42,000
c) Rs.23,42,000
d) Rs.21,42,000
Solution:
Annual earnings/ROR = 200000*75%/7%=2142857
12) Following are the details of Mr. Alok are:
Earnings: Rs 1,00,000 p.a. 
Debts: Rs. 1,28,572
To support dependent’s 75% of pre -death salary (if no death)
Assuming simple interest of 7% per annum, how much times current annual salary does he need in 
terms of life insurance? Use the Capital Retention Method.
a)10 times
b)8 times
c) 12 times
d)16 times
Solution:
Insurance required (using the Capital Retention Approach) = Annual Earnings / Rate of Return. Now 
annual earnings required to support dependents (75% of pre-death salary) = 100000*0.75 = 75000. 
Therefore, insurance required = 75000/0.07 = 1071429
Insurance covered required = 1071429+128572
= 1200000
i.e. approximately 12 times the current annual salary.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 25
13) Rupesh has an expected total income over the next 15 years of Rs.1, 50, 000 p.a. If the inflation 
adjusted discount rate comes to 3% then what is the human life value when there is a lump sum 
requirement of another 300,000 to clear off his outstanding debt?
a. Rs.13, 04,654
b. Rs.18, 44,411
c. Rs.21, 44,411
d. Rs.22, 04,654
Solution:
SET Begin
N 15
I 3
PV ? 1844410.971
PMT -150000
FV 0
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
Note: As in the question specifically mentioned that there is a lumpsum requirement of 300000. 
So, insurance requirement will be = 18, 44,411+3, 00,000 = 21, 44,411
14) The sales literature of an insurer, pertaining to a particular participating policy, claims that in the 
past, the company had paid maturity benefits of 2.5 times the basic sum assured on their 15 years 
endowment policies. The company uses the uniform Simple reversionary bonus system and the 
terminal bonus system to distribute profits to its participating policyholders. Assuming that a uniform 
reversionary bonus rate of Rs.35 per thousand sum assured was declared over the last 15 years, a basic 
sum assured of Rs.50,000 and level annual premiums of 5,066, calculate the terminal bonus content 
in the maturity proceeds (ignore mortality).
a. 5 0 , 0 0 0
b. 48, 750
c. 83,767
d. 75,000
Solution:
Maturity Value = Sum Assured + Reversionary Bonus + Terminal Bonus. Maturity Amount = 
50000*2.5 = 125,000.
Reversionary Bonus = 35*50000/1000*15 = 26250.
Now, Terminal Bonus = Maturity Value – Sum Assured - Reversionary Bonus.
Therefore, Maturity Benefit=125000-50,000–26250=48,750.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 26
15) Mr. & Ms. Doshi aged 50 & 47; both have life expectancy of 25 years. Calculate the insurance 
required based on Need Based Approach for Mr. Doshi. You’ve the following information:
Current Investments = Rs. 35, 50,000
Expenses = Rs. 4, 00,000 (including Rs. 2, 00,000 of Mr. Doshi’s personal expenses) 
Mr. Doshi’s income post-tax = Rs. 5, 00,000
Final Costs = Rs. 1, 00,000
Inflation rate = 5% p.a. Return on investments = 8% p.a.
Solution:
Particulars Amount
Immediate expenses (i.e., final costs) 1,00,000
+ PV (Net Ongoing Expenses) (WN1) 5459740.699
- Available assets (i.e., current investments) -35,50,000
Insurance Required as per NBA 2009740.699
PV of Net Ongoing Expenses
Particulars Amount
Set Begin
N (i.e., life expectancy of surviving spouse) 25
I% 2.857142857 (8% & 5%)
PV ? 5459740.699
PMT 3,00,000 (5 Lakhs - 2 Lakh)
FV, P/Y, C/y 0,1,1
16) 45-Year-old client named Ravi wishes to replace Rs. 7, 80,000 of his Rs. 10, 00,000 annual
incomes for his spouse benefit, upon his death. With the rate of interest as 6.5% p.a. & increase in 
salary at 3.5% p.a. Find the amount needed by the Capital Retention Method?
Solution:
Capital Retention Approach = Annual Income / Rate of Return
 = 7, 80,000/2.8985%
 = Rs. 26910470.93.
17) Rohan’s ideal cover has to be estimated which in case of any exigency will first repay the 
outstanding loans and the remaining would be invested along with the couple’s existing financial 
assets. Such combined corpus would be invested in a 7.5% p.a. return instrument to sustain the 
family’s living expenses and the specific financial goals of higher education of their children. The
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 27
SET Begin
N 14
I 8
PV -400000
PMT 0
FV ? 1174877
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
SET Begin
N 4
I ((7.5-8)/1.08)
PV ? -4732398
PMT 1174877
FV 0
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
Living expenses need to be taken as inflation- adjusted to the extent of 80% of their present household 
expenses for 50 years. What should be the ideal cover?
Additional Information:
 Inflation: 5% p.a.
 Living Expenses: Rs. 4, 80, 000 p.a.
 Accumulate in a fund, higher education expenses of Ved & Vedini. Expenses at their 
respective age of 18 years are Rs. 4 Lakh p.a. (current cost) required for four years, cost 
escalation 8% p.a. (Current age of Ved & Vedini are 4 years & 1 year respectively).
 Outstanding Loans: Rs. 20,90,000
 Assets: Cash – Rs. 570000, Equity Shares - Rs. 1180000, PPF A/c - Rs. 490000
Solution:
Step1: Living Expenses: 1) 80% of Present Expenses for the next 50 years
SET Begin
N 50
I ((7.5-5)/1.05)
PV ? 11420551
PMT 384000
FV 0
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
Step 2: Higher Education: a) Ved: Rs. 4, 00,000 for 4 years after 14 years @ 8%.
SET Begin
N 14
I 7.5
PV ? 1719344
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 28
SET Begin
N 17
I 8
PV -400000
PMT 0
FV ? 1480007
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
SET Begin
N 4
I ((7.5-8)/1.08)
PV ? -5961459
PMT 1480007
FV 0
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
PMT 0
FV 4732398
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
b) Vedini : Rs. 4,00,000 for 4 years required after 17 years @ 8%
SET Begin
N 17
I 7.5
PV ? 1743447
PMT 0
FV 5961459
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
Step 3: Total corpus required to meet the living and household expenses and loans 
11420551 + 1719344 + 1743447 + 2090000 = Rs. 1, 69, 73,342.
Step 4: Financial Assets: 570000+1180000+490000 = Rs. 22, 40,000
Step 5: Life cover needed for Rohan: 16973342 – 2240000 = Rs. 1, 47, 33,342.
18) Mr. Jignesh , has taken a life insurance policy covering him for death. He has taken an insurance 
cover for Rs. 4.5 Crores & has been paying the premiums regularly. While traveling to Italy, he was 
caught in an earthquake, where he lost his life. His family has put across a claim with the insurance 
company for Rs. 4.5 Crore. Will the claim amount be sanctioned?
Solution:
Life insurance covers death caused due to any means. Even if death has been caused on account of a 
natural disaster & if the insured has been paying premiums regularly, the same would be covered 
under life insurance. (However, if Mr. Jignesh is staying in area which is prone to earthquakes or has
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 29
earthquakes more often, and say he applies for a life insurance cover, then the insurance company
may either: -
1. Specifically exclude death on occasion of an earthquake or
2. Include death on occasion of an earthquake but with an increase in premiums or
3. Reject his request for life insurance completely).
19) 35-year-old client named Hardik wishesto replace Rs. 4,55,000 of her Rs. 7,50,000 annual income 
for her spouse benefit, upon her death. Here, the client expects this salary to increase 4.5 percent per 
year and she plans to live to age 82. (Assume she is employed till age 82) And also, conservative 
interest rate is considered as 7.5% p.a.
Solution:
Particulars Amount
Set Begin
N 82-35 = 47
I% 2.87081 (7.5% & 4.5%)
PV ? ₹ 11993281.67
PMT 455000
FV, P/Y, C/y 0,1,1
20) Miss Jagruti resides in Mumbai with her husband, Mr. Jignesh & has taken 2 Mediclaim policies 
covering the same peril. Policy A (issued by ABC Insurance company) is worth Rs. 4,50,000 while 
Policy B (issued by XYZ insurance company) is worth Rs. 2,00,000. She incurs Covid (Coronavirus) 
& is immediately hospitalized. The total cost of hospitalization comes to around Rs. 2,50,000. Miss 
Jagruti approaches you, a qualified financial planner, inquiring if he could raise a claim request (of 
Rs. 2,50,000) to both the companies (i.e. company ABC & XYZ). What would you suggest?
Solution:
In this case the second policy would be hit by the “Principle of Contribution”. Raising a request 
with both the companies means he is paid twice for a single claim, thus the claimant would end up 
profiting from insurance.
If an insured person has coverage under two indemnity insurance policies, he has the right to choose 
under which policy he wants to make the claim. If the claimed amount is higher than the sum insured 
under the policy on which he has first made the claim, the insured person can claim the balance amount 
from the second indemnity policy.
21) If Mr. Prem owns a house in Ahmedabad which is valued at Rs. 85,00,000 insured the house for 
Rs. 45,00,000 against fire (peril) and the house was subsequently destroyed by fire. What would be 
the amount that Mr. Prem would recover?
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 30
Solution:
The insured would only be able to recover Rs. 45,00,000 even if the property is actually worth Rs. Rs. 
85,00,000. If the insured was able to recover Rs. 85,00,000 and so make a profit out of insurance, this 
would constitute a wager (i.e., speculation), which would be against the true nature of insurance.
22) An executive purchased an annuity for a lumpsum Rs 85 Lakhs when he was 55 years and had in 
dependents a non-working spouse of age 48 and a son of age 25. On reaching age 60, he expects at 
least one, himself or his spouse, to survive till 85 years and contracts an immediate life annuity with 
return of purchase price at Rs. 10.50 Lakhs p.a. vested against the purchase price of Rs. 1.50 Crores. 
What return is expected from the vesting date?
Solution:
SET Begin
N (Life Expectancy of Surviving spouse) 85-53
I ? 7.52688%
PV (Purchase of Annuity) -15000000
PMT (Annuity received every year) 1050000
FV (Return of purchase price of annuity) 15000000
P/Y 1
C/Y 1
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 31
RISK MANAGEMENT (INDIA) 
MCQ QUESTIONS
1) Which of the following is correct with respect to Section 101A of the Insurance Act, 1938?
A) Every insurer shall reinsure with the Indian reinsurer such percentage of the sum insured on each 
general insurance policy as may be specified by the Authority.
B) It was enacted to enable the Government to collect information about both life and non-life 
business transacted in India.
C) It ensures that an insurance product should only be used for protection and risk management 
mechanism.
D) None of the above.
Solution A)
2)Your client wants to know more about the term waiver and Estoppel.
Statement 1: Waiver is the conscious and discretionary giving up of a known legal right.
Statement 2: A legal rule that prevents someone from changing their mind about something they have 
previously said is true in court.
Which of the above statements are correct?
A) Both statements are incorrect
B) Both statements are correct
C) Only statement 1
D) Only statement 2
Solution B)
3)Which of the following items does not reinforce the principal of indemnity?
A) Actual cash value
B) Estoppel and policy waiver
C) Insurable interest
D) Proof of loss
Solution B)
4)The goal of risk management is to:
A) Minimize insurance expenditures
B) Make certain that uninsured losses do not occur
C) Minimize the adverse consequences of losses and uncertainty connected with pure risk
D) Eliminate financial loss
Solution C)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 32
5) Which of the following defines role of IRDA?
A) IRDA serves as an industry watch-dog for regulating and promoting the insurance and reinsurance 
industries in India.
B) IRDA is dedicated to developing the Indian Mutual Fund Industry on professional, healthy and 
ethical lines.
C) IRDA is a statutory regulatory body entrusted with the responsibility to regulate the Indian capital 
markets
D) None of the above. 
Solution A) 
Explanation:
The role of IRDAI isto protect the interest of the policy holders, to oversee the growth of the insurance 
industry and to help in bringing economic growth. All the insurance companies and related associates 
such as agents, TPAs, brokers, surveyors, repositories etc are expected to perform and function under 
the aegis of the rules framed by IRDAI.
6)Which of the following committee is responsible to control and regulate the rates, advantages, terms 
and conditions that may be offered by insurers in respect of general insurance business?
A) Committee for payment and settlement business
B) Tariff Advisory Committee
C) Economic Capit0al Framework Committee
D) Asset liability management committee
Solution B)
7) Which of the following is not a function of TAC (Tariff Advisory Committee)?
A) Clarifying Queries of Insurers
B) Inspection of Risks
C) Ensuring Implementation of the Tariffs
D) To recommend Investment policy and lay down the operational framework for the investment 
operation of insurer.
Solution D)
Explanation Under Section 14(2) of the IRDAI Act, 1999, the duties, powers and functions of TAC 
are as follows:
 Drawing up and Updating Tariffs
 Clarifying Queries of Insurers
 Ensuring Implementation of the Tariffs
 Collection of Data and Analysis
 Publishing Tariffs and Other Regulations
 Inspection of Risks
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 33
8)Which of the following is an important link between IRDAI and the non-life insurance industry?
A) Audit and Renumeration committee
B) Life Insurance Council
C) Insurance Advisory Committee
D) Investment Advisory Council
cc B)
Explanation: The Life Insurance Council and the General Insurance Council have been constituted 
under section 64C of the Insurance Act, 1938 in the year 2001. The Insurance Council functions 
through several sub-committees and includes all insurance companies in India.
The mission of Insurance Council is to:
 Function as an effective forum to assist, advise and assist insurers in maintaining high standards 
of conduct and provide services to policyholders
 Interact with the government and various bodies on policy matters
 Actively participate in disseminating insurance awareness in India
 Take steps to develop education and analysis in insurance
9)Which of the following is not a function of Insurance Information Bureau of India?
A) Ensure data is accessible to numerous market players, researchers, policyholders and general 
public for real time decision making
B) Provide benchmark rates for the industry
C) Publish reports to help IRDAI in regulatory functions and insurers in decision making
D) None of the above 
Solution D)
10)What is the main purpose of Insurance Ombudsman?
A) The purpose is quick disposal of the grievances of the policy holders in an efficient, economical 
and impartial manner.
B) To Publish reports to help IRDAI in regulatory functions and insurers in decision making.
C) To Actively participate in disseminating insurance awareness in India
D) None of the above.
Solution A)
11)Who was formed for the purpose of promoting insurance education and training to people working 
or intending to work in the insurance sector?
A) Insurance Information Bureau of India
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 34
B) Insurance Institute of India
C) Insurance Council
D) General Insurance Council 
Solution B)
12)Which of the following is not a function of Insurance Institute of India?
A) To Provide benchmark rates for the industry.
B) To run college and conduct examinations within the insurance field and related subjects for 
awarding certificates, diplomas and degrees to those interested in insurance.
C) To ascertain the law and practice relating to all matters connected with insurance and to 
disseminate such knowledge among those interested in insurance.
D) To Assist people in the insurance industry to acquire the skills and expertise.
Solution A)
13)Agents serve as representatives of the insurance companies? Is this statement Correct
A) Yes
B) No, they are representatives of the policyholders
C) No, they are independent person.
D) Information Insufficient
Solution A)
Explanation: Agents serve as representatives of the insurance companies and sell policies on behalf 
of the insurers
14)Your client has recently learnt more about the insurance business.
Statement 1 Insurance agents can only be paid commission, they cannot be paid salary. 
Statement 2 Every agent has to adhere to the code of conduct specified by IRDAI.
Which of the above statement is correct?
A) Both are Correct
B) Both are Incorrect
C) Only Statement 1
D) Only Statement 2
Solution D) While some agents are salaried, most agents rely on commissions for income.
15) Your client has recently heard about corporate agent that represent an insurance company and sell 
its policies. While doing business corporate agents have to
A) conduct its transactions with clients with utmost good faith and integrity at all times;
B) act with carefulness and persistence;
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 35
C) treat all data given by the potential clients as totally confidential.
D) All of the above 
Solution D)
16) What is Bancassurance?
A) Banks and insurance companies collaborate to make a partnership within which the bank 
sells the insurance firm’s product to its clients.
B) Bancassurance is the process of evaluating a company's risk in insuring a home, car, driver, or an 
individual's health or life.
C) Bancassurance is the practice whereby insurers transfer portions of their risk portfolios to other 
parties by some form of agreement to reduce the likelihood of paying a large obligation resulting 
from an insurance claim.
D) None of the above
Solution A)
17) Bancassurance works well because Insurance company earns a commission amount from the bank 
whereas the bank widens its market share and customer base. Is this statement True or False?
A) True
B) False 
Solution B) 
Explanation:
Bancassurance works well because Banks earns a commission amount from the Insurance Company 
whereas the bank widens its market share and customer base.
18) Your client has asked your opinion about Insurance broker and Insurance agent. You will
suggest him that
A) Unlike an agent who is tied with one company, a broker is not bound by any one company 
and can offer Insurance from all companies.
B) Agents represent Consumers, while brokers represent Insurers.
C) There is no difference between insurance agent and broker
D) None of the above
Solution A)
Explanation:
Insurance brokers provide insurance from all the companies under one roof. Unlike an agent who is 
tied with one company, a broker is not bound by any one company. Agents represent insurers, while 
brokers represent consumers.
19) Which of the following is not the function of insurance broker?
A) Rendering advice on appropriate insurance cover,
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 36
B) Maintaining detailed information of available insurance markets,
C) Submitting quotation received from insurer/s to the client.
D) None of the above
Solution D)
The functions of an insurance broker, as prescribed by the Regulations, include the following:
 Rendering advice on appropriate insurance cover,
 Maintaining detailed information of available insurance markets,
 Submitting quotation received from insurer/s to the client,
 Providing underwriting information of the client to the insurer,
 Assisting clients in paying premium, negotiation of the claims, maintaining proper records of 
claims.
20)Web aggregators supply data relating to insurance products, comparison of comparable products 
offered by different insurance companies and have linkagesto websites of various insurers from where 
customers will choose and get policies on-line.
Is this statement Correct?
A) Yes
B) No, they do not have linkages of websites of various insurers.
C) No, they do not supply data related to insurance products.
D) None of the above
Solution A)
21) Which of the following is not the responsibility of web aggregator?
A) To handle all its transactions with clients with utmost good faith and honesty.
B) Underwriting the insurance policy.
C) Considering all the information supplied by the prospective customers as totally confidential
D) None of the above 
Solution B). 
Explanation:
For conduct in matters relating to client relationship every web aggregator shall:
 handle all its transactions with clients with utmost good faith and honesty
 act with care and diligence
 ensure that the customer understands his relationship with the Web Aggregator and on whose 
behalf the Web Aggregator is acting
 consider all the information supplied by the prospective customers as totally confidential
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 37
 avoid conflict of interest
22) Which of the following is not the duty and responsibilities of a Surveyor and Loss Assessor?
A) Conducting surveys and remark about excess/under insurance.
B) Evaluating liability under the insurance contract
C) Commenting on salvage and its disposal wherever necessary
D) To solicit insurance products and to distribute other financial products by employing 
individuals licensed to market, distribute and service such financial products.
Solution D) To solicit insurance products and to distribute other financial products by employing 
individuals licensed to market, distribute and service such financial products. This isthe responsibility 
of Insurance Marketing Firms.
23) Which of the following is not Insurance repositories?
A) NSDL Database Management Limited
B) Central Insurance Repository Limited
C) Karvy Insurance Repository Limited
D) None of the above.
Solution D)
Explanation: Insurance Repository is a company which is formed and registered under the 
Companies Act, 2013 and has been granted a registration certificate by IRDAI for maintaining 
insurance policies data in electronic form on behalf of the insurance companies.
There are 4 such Insurance repositories as of June 30, 2019:
a) NSDL Database Management Limited
b) Central Insurance Repository Limited
c) Karvy Insurance Repository Limited
d) CAMS Repository Services Limited
24)Which of the following is not the benefit of holding insurance policies in electronic form?
A) Less denial of claim
B) The policies are in safe custody and can be easily accessed when needed
C) No requirement to visit the offices of individual insurance companies for service.
D) No need to go through KYC verification again at the time of purchase of new policy
Solution A)
25)Which is correct with respect to Section 25 of IRDAI Act, 1999?
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 38
A) It lays down the establishment of the Insurance Advisory Committee which advises on 
matters relating to making of regulations for the insurance industry.
B) It lays down the rules regulation for insurance agents, brokers
C) It lays down the rules for loss assessors, Insurance companies and web aggregator.
D) None of the above
Solution A)
26)Which of the following is the Key responsibility of the Insurer?
A) To assist policyholders in managing risk in an efficient way through their insurance products, 
and to pay the claims covered by such insurance products.
B) To maximise profit for its shareholders
C) To Increase the number of financial products offered.
D) None of the above 
Solution A)
Explanation:
Some other key responsibilities of the insurance companies are:
 To mobilize savings of the people.
 To extend the sphere of insurance, thereby including the socially and economically backward 
classes.
 To act as trustees of the insured public.
 To safeguard economic use of resources collected from policyholders.
 To manage business in a fiduciary capacity.
27) Which of the following is not a source of revenue generation for insurance company?
A) Underwriting income
B) Reinvestment income
C) Unpaid claims on lapsed policies
D) None of the above
Solution D) All 3 are sources of revenue for an insurance company.
28)Statement 1 The pure premium, determined by actuarial studies, consists of that part of the 
premium which is necessary to pay for losses and loss related expenses.
Statement 2 ‘Load’ is in addition to the premium which is necessary to cover other expenses, 
particularly sales expenses, and to allow for a profit.
Are these statements Correct
A) No
B) Only Statement 1 is correct
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 39
C) Only Statement 2 is correct
D) Both are correct
Solution D)
29)Is reversionary bonus a part of the guaranteed benefit?
A) True
B) False
Solution A) 
Explanation:
Bonuses, declared regularly and paid at the time of maturity or at the time of policy surrender during 
the policy term or on the death of the life assured, are called reversionary bonuses. Once declared, 
they are included as a part of the guaranteed benefits
30) Your client has recently understood about terminal bonus. He asked you what will happen to the 
amount of terminal bonus if he increases the term of the policy?
A) Increase
B) Decrease
C) Remains Same
D) None of the above 
Solution A)
31) Deduction under section 80C in respect of life insurance premium is restricted to 20% of capital 
sum assured in respect of policies issued on or before31-3-2012 and % of capital 
sum assured in case of policies taken on or after 1-4-2012
A) 20%
B) 10%
C) 15%
D) None of the above
Solution B)
32)What is the minimum holding period in respect of ULIP policy whose premium is claimed as 
deduction under section 80C?
A) 5 years
B) 3 years
C) 2 years
D) 1 years
Solution A)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 40
33)Your client had purchased a term plan few years ago. He is facing financial difficulties now and 
he wants to take loan against his term policy. Is he allowed to take loan against term policy?
A) Yes
B) No
C) Yes, provided that he has paid the premium for last 3 years
D) None of the above 
Solution B) No
Explanation: A loan cannot be taken against a term plan. It can be availed only against traditional 
life insurance policies viz. endowment plans, money-back plans, whole life etc. where there is a 
guaranteed return and the policy itself is used as a collateral for the loan.
34) Your client has an insurance policy and he had taken a loan against his policy
Policy Details:
Sum assured =20 Lacs 
Loan taken= 5 Lacs
Premium = 50,000 Annually
Loan Principal Balance outstanding = 4 Lacs
He has already repaid the entire interest amount and only the principal balance of 4 lakhs is pending 
for repayment. What amount will he receive if the maturity of the policy is today?
A) 20 Lacs
B) Nil because he still has the Loan Outstanding
C) 15 Lacs
D) 16 lacs 
Solution D) 
Explanation:
The loan amount and the interest need to be repaid during the term of the policy. If only interest is 
paid, then at the time of settlement, the due principal amount will be deducted from the claim amount. 
If the policy holder dies during the loan term, the pending amount will be deducted from the claim 
amount and disbursed to the nominee.
35) An employee having salary of 35,000 Pm. What is the maximum benefit he can get in EDLI 
Scheme?
A) No upper limit
B) 6 Lakhs
C) Benefits Calculated considering maximum salary as 15,000
D) 25 Lakhs
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 41
Solution B)
Explanation: The maximum average monthly salary of an employee is capped at Rs. 15,000. If the 
basic salary of a member goes above Rs. 15,000 per month, the maximum benefit is capped at Rs. 
6,00,000
36)Your client has purchased an ULIP plan. He wants to know what amount is receivable on the death 
of policyholder?
A) Sum assured
B) Fund value
C) Higher of the Sum Assured or the Fund Value
D) None of the above
Solution C) 
Explanation:
If the policyholder of a ULIP plan dies during the policy term, the nominee gets the higher of the Sum 
Assured or the Fund Value as a death benefit. So, if the fund value is lower than the sum-assured, then 
the sum assured will be paid. But when the fund's value is more than the sum assured, the death benefit 
paid is the accumulated amount in the fund.
37)Statement 1: Opting for disability insurance is one way of contingency planning.
Statement 2: Contingent planning helps to manage expected outcomes which could otherwise lead to 
temporary financial gains.
Are these statements correct?
A) Both are correct
B) Both are Incorrect
C) Only Statement 1 is correct
D) Inly Statement 2 is correct
Solution C) Only Statement 1 is correct
Explanation:
Contingent planning helps to manage unexpected outcomes which could otherwise lead to temporary 
financial losses.
38)Your client has asked you about operative clause. You will suggest him
A) Operative clause is the declaration by the insurer.
B) Operative clause is an integrated contract in the form of an Agreement between the insured and 
the insurer.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 42
C) Operative clause is a promise that the insurer undertakes to pay the benefits of the policy to 
the insured if the reason for which the policy was incepted happens while the policy is still in 
force.
D) None of the above
Solution C)
39)An Insurance policy in which a policyholder can easily revive his/her lapsed policy by approaching 
the nearby branch office of the insurer and paying all unpaid premiums along with interest. Is what 
type of revival?
A) Special revival
B) Revival due to grace period
C) Instalment revival
D) Ordinary revival 
Solution D)
40)An insured person can revive the policy by taking a policy loan. Is this statement incorrect?
A) Yes
B) No
Solution B)
Explanation the above statement is correct
41) Life insurance is a contract of indemnity where loss of life is indemnified in terms of money. 
Is this statement correct?
A) Yes
B) No
Solution B)
Life insurance is not a contract of indemnity since value of human life cannot be quantified in terms 
of money.
Nonlife insurances are Contract of indemnity where loss of goods and properties is indemnified in
terms of money
42)Which of the following type of insurance is mandatory?
A) Personal accident Insurance
B) Life Insurance
C) Third Party motor Insurance
D) Fire Insurance
Solution C)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 43
43) A Machine worth rupees 50000 insured for 25000 under fire insurance policy. It was damaged 
due to fire and the amount assessed is 20000. What is the maximum claim payable?
A) 20000
B) 25000
C) 50000
D) 10000
Solution D)
44)The third-party administration role mainly involves
A) Checking and paying insurance claims
B) Sending renewal notices
C) Issuing documents on behalf of insurer
D) Selling ;new insurance policies
Solution A)
45) Your client is covered by group health insurance policy. He wants to know can he claim deduction 
of the premium paid from his income?
A) Yes, he can claim deduction under section 80D.
B) No
C) Yes, provided he has paid premium in cheque.
D) Depend on the type of health policy
Solution B) 
Explanation:
Group Health Insurance premium provided by the company is not eligible for deduction by the 
employee. Employers get taxation benefits on a group health insurance.
46). Your client pays health insurance premium for his brother. 
Premium paid = 35000
Sum assured = 4 Lacs
Can your client claim deduction for the premium paid for his brother’s health insurance?
A) Yes, but he can claim only up to 25,000
B) Yes, if his brother is dependent on him
C) Yes, provided that the premium is paid by your client and not by brother.
D) No
Solution D)
The premiums paid for health insurance availed by brothers/sisters do not qualify for tax deductions.
47) What is the maximum amount an HUF can claim deduction under section 80 D if his current age 
is 65 years?
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 44
A) Nil, Only Individuals can claim deduction under section 80D
B) 25,000
C) 50,000
D) None of the above
Solution C)
Explanation:
Just like individual taxpayers, an HUF can also claim a deduction under section 80D for a health 
insurance taken for any of the members of the HUF. This deduction will be Rs. 25,000 for the insured 
member whose age is less than 60 years, and will be Rs. 50,000 for the insured of 60 years of age or 
more. 
48) Which of the following is the benefit of agricultural insurance?
A) It provides benefits farmers to maintain agricultural credit flow
B) Rationalizes loss assessment procedures
C) Helps to build up precise statistical data of crop production
D) All of the above 
Solution D)
49) Your client is engaged in the business of export of apparels. He sells his goods on credit to some 
international client. Now due to economic recession he wants protection against payment delays and 
non-payment by its buyers. Which type of Financial product will you suggest him?
A) Forward swap to hedge against currency movement
B) Marine Insurance
C) Business Insurance
D) Credit Insurance
Solution D) 
Explanation:
Credit insurance is designed to protect manufacturers from the risks due to default in payment.
50) Which of the following is not a form of liability insurance?
A) Public liability
B) Professional indemnity
C) Product liability
D) AgriculturalInsurance 
Solution D)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 45
RISK MANAGEMENT (GLOBAL) 
MCQ QUESTIONS
1)Which of the following defines Risk Minimization?
A) Risk minimization occurs when one individual or entity takes on the risk for the benefit of another.
B) Risk minimization is employing strategies to reduce the likelihood or the severity of loss 
caused by a particular risk.
C)Risk minimization is not doing things that expose one to risk.
D)Risk minimization means retaining and avoiding risk
Solution B)
2)An individual with no life insurance has decided that the risks associated with skiing are worth it 
and does not take steps to avoid, minimize, or transfer the risk, which of the following clearly defines 
his attitude towards risk?
A) Risk retention
B) Risk Avoidance
C)Risk Transfer
D)Risk minimization
Solution A)
3)An individual trades in the derivatives markets. Recently while trading in the derivatives market, he 
has suffered huge losses. His friend suggested him to buy an insurance to avoid such losses in the 
future. He has approached you to ask your opinion on this topic. Which one of the following will you 
suggest him?
A) He can buy an insurance policy to avoid losses in future
B) He can buy insurance policy provided that the risk covered is pure risk and not speculative
C) He cannot buy insurance policy, since trading in derivatives is speculative risk and insurance 
policies covers only pure risk.
D)None of the above
Solution C)
4)What is the meaning of peril and hazard?
A) A peril is the direct cause of the loss and hazard is anything that either causes or increases the 
likelihood of a loss.
B) A Hazard is the direct cause of the loss and peril is anything that either causes or increases the 
likelihood of a loss.
C)A peril is the direct cause of the loss and hazard is anything that either causes or decreases the 
likelihood of a loss.
D)A peril is the indirect cause of the loss and hazard is anything that either causes or increases the
likelihood of a loss.
Solution A)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 46
5)Buying a term insurance policy is to cover which type of pure risk?
A) Catastrophic Losses
B) Death and Disability
C) Loss of Income
D)Accidental Risk
Solution D)
6)Insurers consider four factors before accepting a risk. Which of the following is not one of them?
A) The law of large numbers must apply
B) The loss must be intentional
C) The loss must be measurable and able to be defined
D)The loss must not be financially catastrophic
Solution B)
7)Insurance works on the principle of
A) Sharing of losses
B) Probabilities
C) Large numbers
D) All of the above
Solution D)
8)Insurance helps to
A) Prevent adverse situations from occurring
B) Reduce the financial consequences of adverse situations
C) Negate all consequences of adverse situations
D)Make assets continuously productive
Solution B)
9)An insurer will sue the individual who caused harm to an insured after it has settled the insured’s 
claim. This statement refers to which principal?
A) Subrogation
B) Indemnity
C) Insurable Interest
D) Utmost good
faith
Solution A)
10) The insurer is required to abide by the terms of its contracts. This statement relates to the term
A) Aleatory
B) Adhesion 
C)Unilateral 
D)Conditional
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 47
Solution B)
11) The main purpose of having Life insurance is:
A) As an avenue for long-term investment
B) As a medium for getting income tax benefits from savings
C) As a governmental programme for reducing poverty
D) None of the above
Solution D)
12) The principle of ensures that an insured does not profit by insuring with multiple insurers
A) Subrogation
B) Contribution 
C)Indemnity 
D)Particular Average
Solution B)
13) Compared to the premium for a Term plan, the premium for an Endowment plan will be _____ 
for the same age
A) More
B) Less 
C) Same
D) Varies from insurance policy to policy
Solution A)
14) If only those with high risks obtain insurance coverage, this is an example of
A) Indemnification
B) Adverse selection 
C)Replacement 
D)Subrogation
Solution B)
15) Which of the following items would most likely be covered at replacement cost under your 
homeowners' policy?
A) Stolen Property
B) Damage to your roof
C) Flood damage due to furniture
D) Wind damage due to you fence
Solution C)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 48
16) An insurance advisor is helping you to buy a policy. He asked you to buy a policy which states 
that in the event of a total loss, the policy will reimburse a policyowner the amount required to replace 
the property up to policy limits. Which type of replacement provision advisor is referring to?
A) Actual cash value
B) Replacement cost
C) Inflation guard endorsement
D) Guaranteed replacement cost
Solution B)
17) An insurance policy gives you two option -
Policy A which has higher deductible and Policy B which has lower deductible. Assuming other things 
remain same, which policy will have lower premium
A) Policy A
B) Policy B
C)Both policies will have same premium
D)None of the above
Solution A)
Higher the deductible, lower the premium
18) A neighbour’s negligence causes damage to your home. Your insurer pays you for the damages 
and sues your neighbour for her negligence. The insurance company may do this because of a
A) Co insurance Clause
B) Subrogation
C) Indemnity
D) Principal of contribution
Solution B)
19) A fire destroyed Mr. Shah’s store. Investigators determined the fire originated in the garbage 
dumpster behind the store, and the insurance company indemnified him for his loss. What insurance 
term describes the fire that caused the destruction of Ethan's store?
A) Hazard
B) Severity of loss
C) Peril
D) Captive
Solution C)
20) To indemnify means to
A) Put back in the same financial position just prior to the loss.
B) Put aside funds to pay for losses reported but not yet paid.
C) Transfer risk to someone who has better financial resources and can withstand loss.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 49
D) Make financial provisions for dealing with potential losses.
Solution A)
21) XYZ Insurance Ltd. agreed to insure a large commercial client. Due to the size of this client's 
operations, there is the potential that it could suffer a substantial loss. It would be financially difficult 
for XYZ Ltd. to pay the entire claim itself. To spread this risk, XYZ Ltd. contacted ABC Insurance 
Company to request that it cover a portion of the risk. ABC insurance Company agreed, but only on 
the condition that it receives a portion of the premium the client has paid to XYZ Insurance Ltd.
The term that best describes this scenario is
A) Retention.
B) Reinsurance.
C) Loadings.
D) Casualty insurance.
Solution B)
22) Your client states “There are some policies that are designed to remain in force as long as the 
person insured is alive. Insurers can accomplish this because these policies retain a portion of the 
premium in the form of cash value, which helps offset the increasing cost of insurance as the insured 
ages”
Which type of policy is he talking about?
A) Permanent policies
B) Term Policy
C)Life Insurance 
D)Endowment Plan
Solution A)
23) Which of the following clearly defines the meaning of cash value in a life insurance policy?
A) Cash value is an additional cost built into an insurance policy to cover losses which are higher than 
anticipated for the company arising from the insuring a person who is probe to a form of risk
B) Cash value is the maximum amount of risk retained by an insurer per life.
C) The cash value of a life insurance policy equals the total amount of premiums paid minus the 
cost of insurance and other charges assessed by the carrier.
D) None of the above
Solution C)
24) Your client wants to buy a policy that will provide him the coverage for the insured’s whole life, 
but will allow him payments to be made for a shorter period of time. Which type of policy is he talking 
about?
A) Endowment
B) ULIP
C) Whole life policy
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 50
D) Limited Pay whole Life Policy
Solution D)
25) You have a meeting with an insurance company and they explain you two policies 
Policy A -This Policy covers two people and pay death benefit after both individuals die
Policy B -This policy covers two individuals and pay the death benefit when the first covered person 
dies.
Which type of policies are they talking about?
A) Policy A and Policy B are both term plans
B) Policy A is first to die joint life policy and policy B is second to die joint life policy
C) Policy A is second to die joint life policy and policy B is first to die joint life policy
D)None of the above.
Solution C)
26) What is the main difference between an absolute and collateral assignment?
A) An absolute assignment transfers all ownership rights in the contract from the owner to 
someone else. On the other hand, collateral assignment transfers some rights, but not all.
B) Collateral assignment transfers all ownership rights in the contract from the owner to someone
else. On the other hand, an absolute assignment transfers some rights, but not all.
C) Absolute assignment can be used as a collateral for loan. On the other hand, collateral assignment 
cannot be used as a collateral.
D) None of the above
Solution A)
27) Mr Rahul had purchased a Term life insurance policy three years ago.
Premium due on March 1, 2021.
Grace Period 30 days.
Premium amount= Rs. 10,000
Sum Assured = Rs.15,00,000
Rahul dies on March 15, 2021.
What amount will his family receive from the insurance company? 
A) Rs.15,00,000
B) Nil 
C)Rs.14,90,000 
D)None of the above
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 51
Solution c) Because If an individual dies during the grace period, the insurer will subtract any 
outstanding premium amount from the death benefit proceeds
28) Which of the following means Contestable period in Insurance Policy?
A) The life insurance Contestable period is a short window in which insurance companies can 
investigate and deny claims.
B) A contestable period is a set length of time after the due date during which payment may be made 
without penalty.
C) Contestable period is a part of an insurance policy that stipulates when coverage can begin again 
after a recent accident.
D) None of the above
Solution A)
The life insurance Contestable period is a short window in which insurance companies can investigate 
and deny claims.
29) Your client has recently purchased a life insurance policy. He has approached you to help him in 
selecting the beneficiary of the policy. In case if he dies, he wants proceeds from the insurance 
company to be given to his wife. In case if his wife is not alive at that time, he wants proceeds to be 
given to his son. What advise will you give to him?
A) He can select any one of them as beneficiary
B) He should only select his wife as the beneficiary
C) He should only select his son as the beneficiary
D) He should select wife as primary beneficiary and his son as contingent beneficiary.
Solution D)
30) You have started your own financial planning practice. One of your clients had committed suicide. 
His wife approaches you to understand what amount she will receive from the insurance company?
Details given
Policy purchase date Jan 01, 2010.
Sum Assured = Rs. 25 Lacs
Exclusion period 3 years
Annual premium= Rs. 25,000
A) Nil
B) He will receive the total premiums that he had paid
C) 25 Lacs
D)24,75,000
Solution C)
Death by suicide is normally excluded during a specified period following policy inception. The 
exclusion period usually is one or two years. This clause provides that if the insured commits suicide
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 52
Within the exclusion period, the insurance company only has to return premiums paid, perhaps with 
interest. Once the exclusion period passes, suicide is treated as any other death and entire sum assured 
is paid.
31) On their way home from school, two children Ram and Shyam enjoyed throwing rocks at vehicles 
from a bridge overlooking the freeway. One day, a rock they threw smashed the front windshield of a 
vehicle and scared the driver, who crashed into the guardrail. The driver was not injured, but the 
damage to the vehicle was substantial. Both Ram and Shyam were later caught by the police, and their 
parents were forced to pay for the damages to the vehicle involved in the accident.
Ram and Shyam’s actions can be described as an example of
A) The theory of probability.
B) Negligence.
C) Exposure to risk.
D) The law of large numbers.
Solution B)
32) One of your clients wants to purchase an insurance policy which will pay him the dividends. 
Which type of policy will you suggest him?
A) Cumulative Insurance policy
B) Non-cumulative Insurance Policy
C) Participating Insurance Policy
D) Non participating Insurance Policy
Solution C)
When a policy pays a dividend to a policy owner, that policy is said to be participating policy.
33) XYZ Insurance company is able to offer affordable insurance policies to its insureds. The low 
premiums enjoyed by its policyholders can be attributed to the company's community involvement 
and low operating costs, since it is a corporation owned by its policyholders. The policyholders take 
part in the company's operations through voting rights and by sharing in the financial successes and 
failures of the company.
What kind of insurance company is XYZ Insurance Company?
A) Captive insurance company.
B) Mutual insurance company.
C) Stock company.
D) None of the above
Solution B)
34) You are attending an Investment conference. You meet one of your old friend and you both are 
having discussion on the Insurance policies. Your friend states that there is a provision that permits 
the policyowner to convert the term insurance into a cash value (permanent) form of insurance.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 53
Which type of clause is he referring to?
A) Common Disaster clause
B) Settlement Clause
C) Conversion Clause
D)There is no such provision available.
Solution C) 
35)
Which of the above statement is correct?
A) Only Statement 1 is correct
B) Only Statement 2 is correct
C) Neither statement 1 nor statement 2
D) Both are correct
Solution D)
36) The main purpose of the guaranteed insurability rider benefit is to give the policyholder the right 
to
A) Increases cover when a key life event occurs
B) Maintain insurance cover despite fall in investment value.
C) Includes his dependents in the policy
D) None of the above
Solution A)
37) Which of the following ratio is not used in NAIC Criteria to evaluate an insurance company?
A) Gross change in capital structure and reserves
B) Return on capital employed.
C) Changes in product and asset mix
D) Commissions and expenses to premiums and deposited.
Solution B)
38) Mr Rahul is trying to understand about various risk involved in the insurance business. Mr Rahul 
tells you about the risk arising from underestimating liabilities from existing business or not properly 
pricing prospective business. Which type of risk is he referring to?
A) Credit Risk
B) Asset Risk
C) Underwriting Risk
D) Off Balance sheet risk.
Solution C)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
Statement 1- In Insurance, only financial loss can be compensated
Statement 2- In order to be insurable, a risk must be capable of statistical estimation.
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 54
39) An insurance company uses operating leases in their business (They do not list the asset and 
corresponding liability on its own balance sheet). Which type of risk is involved if someone is 
investing in this insurance company?
A) Credit Risk
B) Asset Risk
C) Underwriting Risk
D) Off Balance sheet risk.
Solution D)
40) Your client has recently heard about a new term “Lapse Ratio”. He approaches you to help him 
understand the same. What will you suggest him?
A) Lapse ratio is the reduced amount of sum assured paid by the insurer in case of discontinuation of 
the policy.
B) Lapse ratio is the total percentage of fund assets used for administrative of the insurance company.
C) The lapse ratio represents the percentage of policies that are terminated each year out of all 
policies in force.
D) All of the above
Solution C)
41) Is it necessary that policy holder and insured be the same person?
A) Yes
B) No
C) Depends on case to case
D) Yes, in case of life insurance, No in case of general insurance.
Solution B)
Explanation:
The policyholder may also be the insured. For instance, a husband might purchase an insurance policy 
on his own life to protect his wife and children in case of his death. In that case, the husband is the 
policy owner and the insured.
Or a policyholder could also be the beneficiary and not insured. That same husband might purchase 
an insurance policy on his wife's life, naming himself as a beneficiary, to protect his family's financial 
welfare in case she died. In that case, the husband is the policyholder and the beneficiary -- and his 
wife is the insured.
42) What are the some of the factors that you will consider before selecting your advisor?
A) Experience
B) Training and Education
C) Reputation
D) All of the above
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 55
Solution D)
43) Which of the following statement is incorrect?
Statement 1 Keyman life policy proceeds can be set off against lost income from business.
Statement 2 Keyman life policy can provide compensation to protect profits
Statement 3 keyman life policy can compensate for losses incurred due to stoppage of work, following 
the absence of the keyman from the work.
A) Statement 2
B) Statement 1 
C)Statement 3 
D)None of the above
Solution D)
44) Excursion in a health policy means
A) Diseases specifically not covered
B) Diseases covered under the policy
C) Both option A and B
D) None of the above
Solution A)
45) According to a common law, when should be the insurable interest present in the insurance 
contract for a fire insurance?
A) At the time of purchasing insurance policy
B) At the time of claim
C) Both option A and B
D) None of the above
Solution A)
46) Mr. Harshad is the Human resource manager of company ABC and looking for the life insurance 
policy. The insurance agent informs her that the company ABC must ensure that a minimum number 
of employees will be covered under the group policy. Mr Harshad approaches you to know the main 
reason behind this requirement. What will you be your response?
A) To reduce premium cost per employee
B) To reduce the administration charges
C) To ensure maximum people in the company are insured.
D) Avoid adverse selection
Solution D) 
Explanation:
Adverse selection basically refers to the tendency of people whose exposure to risk is higher than 
average to purchase insurance to a greater extent than those whose exposure is less than average.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 56
47) You client has approached you to know about the disability income benefit rider in the life 
insurance policy. Which of the following statement are correct?
1)A waiting period normally applies before income benefits are provided to the insured. 
2)Income benefits will be provided during the insured disability.
3)Death benefits will be reduced if income benefits are provided to the insured.
A) All statements are correct
B) Only Statement 1 is correct
C) Only statement 2 is correct
D) Statement 1 and 2
Solution D)
48) Rohit and Alia are married couple. Rohit had already purchased a life insurance policy. Primary 
beneficiary in the life policy of Rohit is alia and the contingent beneficiary is Jay. Recently Rohit and 
Alia met with an accident and both of them passed away.
Who will receive proceeds from the Insurance Company?
A) Legal heirs of Rohit and alia
B) Dependents of alia since alia is the primary beneficiary
C) Jay because primary beneficiary is not alive
D) Parents of Rohit
Solution C)
The contingent beneficiary will be entitled to the death benefit on the death of primary beneficiary.
49) You recently met with the Chief Risk officer of an insurance company. He states “Conducting a 
risk management audit is the most appropriate way to begin developing and optimizing a risk 
management strategy”
Is this statement Correct?
A) Yes
B) No
C) Information insufficient 
D) None of the above
Solution A)
50)Your client has already existing employer-sponsored and government-provided benefits 
adequately cover potential medical expense exposure. What will you suggest him on purchasing 
additional insurance cover?
A) Purchase an additional cover
B) No additional insurance cover needed
C) None of the above
Solution B)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 57
51) Which of the following is not a part of risk management strategy?
A) Select the most appropriate risk management technique
B) Review the current situation
C) Transfer and Retain Risk
D) Identify the Risk 
Solution C) 
Explanation -
A risk management strategy should include the following steps:
 Identify the risks
 Review (and inspect) current situation
 Analyze the information
 Select the most appropriate risk management technique
 Implement the chosen approaches
 Monitor results
52) Which one of the following final expense should not be considered when considering potential 
life insurance needs?
A) Funeral and unpaid medical expense
B) Outstanding debts
C) Expenses required to increase the standard of living
D) Estate settlement cost
Solution C)
53) Which one of the following is not part of four main rating agencies?
A) ICRA
B) Standard and Poor’s
C) Moody’s
D) Fitch
Solution A)
The four are Standard and Poor’s, Moody’s, Fitch, and A.M. Best. Each of these organizations rate 
insurer’s financial stability and well-being.
54) How much benefit will a normal LTC insurance policy pay for expenses incurred when a family 
member provides LTC care services?
A) No Amount
B) Amount as specified in the policy
C) Salary of the family member
D) Average renumeration of the caretaker
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 58
Solution A)
Typically, the insurer will pay no amount for services provided by a family member. Some policies 
include a respite care benefit that allows the caregiver to take a break from caregiving by paying for 
another caregiver to step in.
55) Negligence is what kind of tort?
A) An intentional tort
B) An unintentional tort
C) A criminal tort
D) None of the above
Solution B)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 59
ADDITIONAL MCQ QUESTIONS 
OF RISK MANAGEMENT
1. Crop insurance is an important part of agriculture in India. Which one of the following losses is
covered under crop insurance?
a) Burning of crop by order of a public authority
b) Loss of revenue due to fall in price of agricultural commodities
c) Malicious damage due to negligence of the farmer
d) Damage caused by birds or animals
Answer (b)
2. Insurers consider four factors as requirements for an insurable risk. One of the reasons why it may 
not be possible to purchase insurance to cover a certain peril or the coverage premium may be so high 
as to be prohibitive is most likely an example of which factor?
a) The loss must be by chance.
b) The loss must be measurable and able to be defined.
c) The law of large numbers must apply.
d) The loss must not be financially catastrophic 
Answer: (d)
Reason: The loss must not be financially catastrophic. A catastrophic loss to an insurer is not the same 
as a catastrophic loss to an individual. Loss of a house might be financially catastrophic to a family. 
However, loss of one house would not make much financial difference to an insurer. On the other 
hand, the loss of 10,000 houses could definitely be financially catastrophic for an insurer, to the extent 
that the company might no longer be viable as a business. This is one of the reasons why it may not 
be possible to purchase insurance to cover a certain peril.
3. There are four insurance concepts that apply to insurance law that affect the operation of the 
insurance policy. The transfer of rights and entitlements from one individual to another most likely 
falls under which of the concepts:
a) Insurable interest
b) Subrogation
c) Indemnity
d) Utmost good faith
Answer: (b)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 60
Reason: Subrogation involves the transfer of rights and entitlements from one individual to another
4. The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 regulates all aspects of road transport vehicles in India. Which one 
of the following is a correct provision of Motor Insurance under the Act?
a) As per the Act, motor insurance is optional for vehicles engaged in government essential services.
b) The cover ensures the insured's liability in respect of only death or bodily injury to third parties 
and not to damage of property of third parties.
c) Motor insurance does not provide cover against loss or damage to the insured vehicle due to 
terrorist activity.
d) The cover ensures the insured's liability in respect of death or bodily injury to third parties 
and also damage to property of third parties.
Answer: (d)
5. A loss assessor in insurance sector is an individual, or a firm, who deals with cases related to a 
claim. Which one of the following statements correctly describes the function of a loss assessor?
a) Providing underwriting information of the client to the insurer.
b) Conducting spot and final surveys, and quantifying claims
c) Processing and settlement of claims.
d) Processing forms, paperwork and premiums in a timely and precise manner.
Answer: (b)
Reason: Loss assessor’s duty is to conduct survey of the damaged property in question, and to 
properly quantify claim such that it is filed for an accurate and realistic amount.
6. The major risk management areas are: property, liability, life, health, and disability. Financial 
advice is a holistic process, and recommendations a financial advisor makes in one area often have an 
impact on one or more other areas. Few individuals can effectively address all financial needs to the 
same degree and at the same time. In the case of a client with limited funds, risk-management goal 
prioritization is a valuable activity as risk transfer always costs money to implement. Which of the 
following statements regarding risk management strategies is most likely correct?
a) Risk management prioritization is not often a matter of balancing needs with available resources.
b) Top risk management priorities should be those areas of risk that can cause the most harm.
c) All risks require insurance.
d) A person may not have enough assets so that purchasing insurance is not necessary.
Answer: (b)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 61
7. Motor vehicle (car) insurance normally has four main coverage sections: liability, medical 
payments, physical damage, and uninsured motorists. The car insurance policy makes payments based 
primarily on the obligation of the insured. Rani owns a car and she allows her daughter Katrina to use 
the car. One afternoon Katrina was not feeling well and let her friend Karisma drive her home from 
school. Karisma damaged the car backing up in the parking lot. Which of the following statements is 
most likely correct?
a) Rani will receive an insurance payment because the policy covers any person authorized by the 
insured to drive the covered vehicle.
b) Rani will receive an insurance payment because the policy covers any person authorized to use the 
covered car.
c) Rani will receive an insurance payment because the policy covers the named insured or any family 
member living in the insured’s household.
d) Rani will not receive an insurance payment because the policy does not cover any person to use 
the covered car.
Answer: (d)
Reason: Rani will not receive an insurance payment because the policy does not cover any person to 
use the covered car. Rani will not receive an insurance payment. The person has to be authorized to 
use the car. Katrina is authorized by Rani to use the car, Karisma is not authorized. The car insurance 
policy makes payments based primarily on the obligation of the insured. The policy definesthe insured 
as being: 1) the named insured or any family member (living in the insured’s household, 2) Any person 
authorized to use the covered car, 3) Any person authorized by the insured to drive the covered vehicle
8. To what extent is the liability of a health insurance company to pay claims under an indemnity plan, 
also known as Mediclaim?
a) Actual expenses incurred in treatment
b) Actual expenses incurred, up to the amount insured for specified illnesses.
c) The sum insured on contracting the disease, irrespective of amount spent
d) A maximum of 10 times the premiums paid.
Answer: (b)
Reason: Under an indemnity plan, the insured can claim reimbursement of actual expenses incurred, 
up to the amount insured for specified illnesses, as per the terms and conditions of the policy.
9. Suhas has a health insurance plan. The plan comes with a co-insurance percentage of 70% up to the 
maximum out-of-pocket limit of Rs. 1,00,000 and a deductible of Rs. 10,000. During the policy period
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 62
Suhas fell ill and had to spend Rs. 75,000 for his medical treatment. What claim amount would be 
paid by the insurance company to Suhas under his policy?
a) Rs. 45,500
b) Rs. 52,500
c) Rs. 65,000
d) Rs. 90,000
Answer: (a)
Reason: Rs. 45,500 Total medical expense = 75,000; Deductible = 10,000; Remaining amount = 
75,000 – 10,000 = 65,000 Applying co-insurance insurance company pays = 65,000*70% = 45,500
10. Primary insurance companies ‘cede’ business to a re-insurer, which can either be treaty or 
facultative. Which one of the following options correctly represents the feature of a facultative reinsurance?
a) It covers extensive groups of policies
b) It covers specific high-value risks which the ceding company prefers to pass on.
c) The ceding company agrees to cede all risks to the re-insurer
d) It is limited to only property re-insurance
Answer: (b)
Reason: It covers specific high-value risks which the ceding company prefers to pass on. Facultative 
re-insurance is issued after an individual analysis of the specific risks by the re-insurer, and facts of 
the underlying policy. It covers specific individual, high-value risks which the ceding company does 
not prefer to retain under treaty.
11. Endorsements are an important part of policy document and can be issued at the time of purchase, 
mid-term or during the renewal period of the insurance policy. Which of the following statement 
correctly defines the meaning of endorsement in the context of an insurance policy?
a) A process of transfer of the insured’s benefits to the beneficiary.
b) It is a documentation which incorporates amendments, or additions, in the existing terms of 
the policy.
c) Insurer’s acceptance of the claim raised by the insured as per policy.
d) Insurer’s acceptance of the proposed risk.
Answer: (b)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 63
Reason: Any material changes, or amendments, to the existing insurance policy are made by an 
endorsement in the policy document.
12. Your client Anushka qualified for reduced disability benefits, and the insurance carrier adjusts her 
monthly disability benefit based on a formula that considers her loss of earned income relative to her 
prior earned income. What type of reduced disability benefit does Anushka's plan most likely have?
a) Permanent disability
Residual disability
b) Partial disability
c) Temporary disability
Answer : (b)
Reason: A residual disability provision allows for a lesser number of benefits to be paid if the insured 
is able to return to work in some capacity.
13. Life often presents difficult situations. Whether it’s an illness leading to loss of work, significant 
damage to a home, a recreational accident, or a car crash, each can cause financial loss. Some risks of 
loss can be addressed without insurance, but others are best addressed by transferring the risk to an 
insurer. Risks may be relatively simple or complex. Regardless of the nature, risk management begins 
with an identification of the types of and potential exposures to risk. In the data gathering step a 
financial advisor will help to identify potential risks your client faces. In your analysis, you will 
evaluate various options for addressing these risks and present your recommendations to the client. 
Your client Sophie is newly married and starting a family. You and Sophie have looked at various life 
insurance options but for now the premiums are too high versus her budget. Sophie has decided that 
she will no longer partake in sky diving activities because she feels it is a high-risk sport that places 
her in too much danger. Sophie's decision to decline participation is a risk management technique 
commonly referred to as:
a) Risk Avoidance
b) Risk Transfer
c) Risk Minimization
d) Risk Retention
Answer: (a)
Reason: Risk avoidance is not doing things that expose one to risk. Sophie has decided to avoid sky 
diving due to her new family situation.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 64
14. Insurance policies are legal contracts. Each party to a contract has a legal relationship with the 
company and vice versa. As a legal contract, there are standard terms and conditions and several 
elements to consider in a company evaluation when selecting an insurance company. The fact that a 
policy owner accepts the standard wording of an insurance contract, with no opportunity to negotiate 
variances to the wording, makes the policy one of:
a) Universal
b) Adhesion
c) Unilateral
d) Aleatory
Answer: (b)
Reason: Adhesion: The insurer is required to abide by the terms of its contracts. In other words, 
because the company wrote the contract, it must honour itsterms. This type of contract is one prepared 
by one party to the contract and requires the other party to the contract to accept or reject all of the 
conditions within the contract as a whole.
15. Mohit had purchased only compulsory third-party policy for his car. He jumped a red light and 
collided with another car and then with the boundary wall of a nearby house. Damage to his car was 
of Rs. 25,000, damage to another car was of Rs. 10,000 and damage to the boundary wall of the house 
was of Rs. 20,000. How much claim will the insurance company pay to Mohit?
a) Rs. 30,000
b) Rs. 45,000
c) Rs. 35,000
d) Rs. 55,000
Answer (a)
Rs. 30,000 Damage to another car – Rs. 10,000 Damage to the boundary wall of the house – Rs. 
20,000. Total claim = Rs. 30,000 since Mohit took third party liability policy, he will not be given 
claim for the damage of his own car.
16. General insurance includes cover for many risk exposures. Which of the following statements 
regarding general insurance is most likely correct?
a) Homeowner's insurance does not include expenses incurred while the dwelling is damaged, by a 
covered peril, beyond the point where the dwelling can be occupied.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 65
b) Homeowner's insurance does not include medical payments to others, claims expenses, and damage 
to property of others.
c) Property insurance covers personal residences, outbuildings, warehouses, office buildings, 
condominiums and town houses, and apartment buildings.
d) Property insurance covers personal residences, outbuildings, warehouses, office buildings, 
condominiums and town houses, apartment buildings, and land.
Answer: (c)
17. It is important for a financial advisor to help their client's prioritize action steps to assist their 
client's in implementing risk management strategies. Conducting a risk management audit is the most 
appropriate way to begin developing and optimizing a risk management strategy. In a risk
management audit with your client, the information gathered inclused the following: your client 
Kareena has just started her own consulting business after a long and successful career with a major 
employer but has lost employer-sponsored medical benefits. Kareena has also been appointed as a 
Director to a non-profit organization board. Kareena's successful career has enabled her to be 
classified as a "high net worth individual" (HNWI). Kareena has no dependents. The insurance 
priorities for Kareena in the order of most important to least important are most likely:
a) Health insurance, life insurance, personal liability insurance.
b) Personal liability insurance, life insurance, health insurance.
c) Professional liability insurance, healthcare insurance, and disability insurance.
d) Life insurance, personal liability insurance, and healthcare insurance.
Answer: (c)
Reason: Kareena started he own consulting company so she should have errors and omissioins 
professional liability coverage. Kareena has lost her employer health insurance so she should prioritize 
that and she may want t oconsider disability. As a High Net Worth Investor with no dependents, it is 
unlikely that Kareena requires additional life insurance.
18. Aniket wants to renew his car insurance policy. His vehicle is 4 years old and it's IDV as on date 
is Rs. 4.25 lakh. He has received the following quotation from his insurer for breakup of premiums:
(Own Damage) Base Premium – Vehicle Rs. 8,100 Premium
- Electrical fittings 5% of Base premium
(Liability premium) Basic Third Party Rs. 4,250
Legal liability to driver Rs. 650
No claim bonus (NCB) 25%
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 66
What would be the gross premium payable by Aniket for his car insurance for the coming year, 
ignoring the taxes?
a) Rs. 6,379
b) Rs. 10,054
c) Rs. 11,279
d) Rs. 10,216
Answer: (c)
Reason:
 Basic Own Damage premium Rs. 8100
 + Premium for Electrical fittings =5%*8100 Rs. 405
 Total Rs. 8505
 (-)NCB =25%*8505 Rs. 2126
 8505-2126 = 6379
 Net Rs. 6379
 + Liability premium for Third Party Rs. 4250 
 + Liability premium for driver Rs 650
 Gross Premium Rs. 11,279
19.The most significant financial investment made by most people is their personal residence and as 
such, conscientious homeowners often carry some form of homeowner insurance coverage. As a 
financial planner also licensed for insurance, your client calls you in some distress. While they were 
on vacation, their pumbling pipes accidently overflowed from a bad connection made when 
remodelling the kitchen. What is even more unfortunate is when the friend who was asked to check 
in on the place, slipped on the water on the floor and injured herself and broke her new phone. She 
had to go to the hospital and pay for a treatment to her injured arm. Which of the following statement's 
regarding homeowner's insurance is most likely true?
a) Under broad form coverage of perils, the accidental discharge or overflow of water is covered by 
homeowner's insurance. Setion II of a homeonwer's insurance may cover medical payments to 
others, claims expenses, and damage to property of others.
b) Under broad form coverage of hazards, the accidental discharge or overflow of water is 
covered by homeowner's insurance. Section II of a homeowner's insurance may cover 
medical payments to others, claims expenses, and damage to property of others.
c) Under broad form coverage of hazards, the accidental discharge or overflow of water is covered 
by homeowner's insurance. Section II of a homeowner's insurance may cover medical payments 
to others, claims expenses, and damage to property of others.
d) Under broad form coverage of hazards, the accidental discharge or overflow of water is covered 
by homeowner's insurance. Section II of a homeowner's insurance may cover medical payments 
to others, claims expenses, and damage to property of others.
Answer: (b)
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 67
20. As people in most territories are living longer, they often require another level of healthcare. In 
many places, hospital-based care tendsto be somewhat short-term. A financial advisor skilled in eldercare advice can be of tremendous benefit to an elderly person or the adult children of an elderly person looking 
for long-term care. Long-term care insurance is the insurance product specifically designed to help pay for the 
long-term care needs individuals may have. An important part of this process is helping clients determine how
much long-term care coverage may be needed. Which of the following statements regarding long-term care is 
most likely correct?
a) Long-term care (LTC) is generally divided into three categories: skilled nursing care, intermediate 
care, and custodial care. Insurance companies often use a list of activities of daily living (ADLs) 
to determine when coverage will be triggered. Similar to disability income insurance policies, 
long-term care policies use an elimination period that substitutes a dollar amount for a time period 
that functions as a deductible. Maximum benefit periods typically range from two years to 10 
years.
b) Long-term care (LTC) is generally divided into two categories: skilled nursing care, and 
custodial care. Insurance companies often use a list of activities of daily living (ADLs) to 
determine when coverage will be triggered. Long-term care policies do not use an elimination 
period. Maximum benefit periods typically range from two years to 10 years.
c) Long-term care (LTC) is generally divided into three categories: skilled nursing care, intermediate 
care, and custodial care. Insurance companies often use a list of activities of daily living (ADLs) 
to determine when coverage will be triggered. Similar to disability income insurance policies, 
long-term care policies use an elimination period that substitutes a dollar amount for a time period 
that functions as a deductible. Benefit periods are typically lifetime benefits.
d) Long-term care (LTC) is generally divided into four categories: skilled nursing care, intermediate 
care, home-care, and custodial care. Insurance companies often use a list of activities of daily 
living (ADLs) to determine when coverage will be triggered. Long-term care policies do not use 
an elimination period. Maximum benefit periods typically range from two years to 10 years.
Answer: (b)
21. In some cases a group health insurance policy is part of an employer’s statutory obligation. Which 
one of the following statements correctly describes a feature of group health insurance policy?
a) Group health insurance policies do not provide cover to family members of the employees.
b) Group health insurance policies are designed to include and exclude employees as members.
c) Group health insurance policies are generally high in premiums.
d) Tax deduction can be availed by the employee for the premiums paid by the employer.
Answer: (b)
Reason: These plans are designed to include and exclude members as they join and leave the 
company.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 68
 
22.Alia's apartment was destroyed by a fire, which the fire department believe was caused by a 
defective connection between the gas stove cooker and the gas line. The hazard in this case is:
a) The fire.
b) The defective connection between the gas stove cooker and the gas line.
c) Fact that the gas stove cooker uses gas.
d) The use of gas to cook in Alia's home.
Answer: (b)
Reason: Losses (i.e., risks) are caused by perils. Perils such as fire can cause property damage. The 
term hazard is used to describe those things that increase the chance of loss by a peril. The fire is the 
peril. The defective connection is the hazard that increased the chance of fire. Perils may be 
specifically named in an insurance policy to identify what is covered as well as what is not covered.
23. The ‘Conditions’ component in a typical motor insurance contract is associated with which one of
the following items?
a) Exclusions in the Insurance Contract
b) Limitations on the Insurer’s promise to perform
c) Details specific to the policy
d) A promise to pay the benefits of the policy to the insured
Reason: Limitations on the Insurer’s promise to perform The ‘Condition’ section, or component, in a 
motor insurance contract, specifies the limitations on the insurer’s promise to perform under the 
policy.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 69
ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST 
MCQ QUESTIONS- (INDIA)
1. Which of the following is not an example of lineal Consanguinity?
A. Cousins
B. Mother-Daughter
C. Mother-Son
D. Son- Father
Correct Answer: A
2. A will may be declared void ifA. made by a person who is of unsound mind or a minor
B. obtained by fraud or coercion
C. Not expressive of any definite intention or is void for uncertainty.
D. All of the Above 
Correct Answer: D
3. Which of the following is not true about the succession certificate?
A. It is a certificate issued by a court of jurisdiction, usually a district court, to legal heirs & confers 
authority to inherit debts, securities & other movable assets.
B. It cannot be granted to a minor.
C. It is granted to a person known as Administrator by a competent court.
D. It can be granted to a sound person.
Correct Answer: C
4. What is the preferred order considered while appointing an administrator under Letters of
Administration?
A. Widow or Widower.
B. Petitioning creditors.
C. Both A & B are given first preference.
D. None of these
Correct Answer: A
5. According to Hindu Succession Act legal heirs are defined as
A. Class I
B. Class II
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 70
C. Agnates and cognates
D. All of the above 
Correct Answer: D
6. According to The Indian Succession Act
A. By marriage a woman acquires the domicile of her husband, if she had not the same domicile 
before.
B. The domicile of a minor follows the domicile of the parent from whom he derived his domicile of 
origin.
C. The domicile of origin of an illegitimate child is in the country in which, at the time of his birth, 
his mother was domiciled.
D. All of the above.
Correct Answer: D
7. Testamentary succession means
A. Succession to a property of the deceased in accordance with the provisions in the last will
B. Property will be inherited by the heirs in accordance with the law of succession.
C. All of the above
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A
8. Which of the following statements is not true about a will?
A. A codicil can be issued to make amendments in the will made by the testator
B. A will comes into effect after the testator dies
C. A certified copy of will is called probate
D. A will can be altered after the death of testator 
Correct Answer: D
9. When is a person said to have died intestate?
A. A person who had died having made a will.
B. A person who has died without having made a will.
C. A person who has no assets to distribute on death.
D. Both A & C
Correct Answer: B
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 71
10. How many domiciles can a person own?
A. Two
B. Three
C. One
D. None
Correct Answer: C
11. Which of the following is not a type of domicile?
A. Domicile by Acquisition
B. Domicile by Choice
C. Domicile of Origin
D. Domicile by operation of law
Correct Answer: A
12. What happens when property is bequeathed to a child in the womb under Muslim law?
A. bequest to a child in the womb is valid, if the child is born within six months of testator’s death.
B. If the child is not born within six months, the bequest will lapse and will form a part of the 
remaining property of the testator which is not bequeathed under a will.
C. bequest to a child in the womb is void
D. Either A or B
Correct Answer: D
13. Which of the following is not an appropriate option to fit in for principle of propinquity?
A. When a Hindu dies intestate, this principle of propinquity is use of no use since there is no 
will for determining the proportion of allocation of a respective estate.
B. This rule is also known as doctrine of survivorship.
C. The principle of propinquity, meaning in order of nearness of blood relation, that is, nearest degree 
of blood relation forms the basis of succession.
D. It signifies the right by which an heir may take possession of the estate.
Correct Answer: D
14. In case none of the Class I legal heirs are present then the property in case of the death of Hindu 
male will
A. Be transferred to Class II legal heirs
B. Not be transferred
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 72
C. Will be transferred to his wife
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A
15. Succession depends on
A. The law applicable to the deceased at the time of his/her death
B. Testamentary under Will of the deceased
C. The nature of property or rights and obligations held by the deceased at the time of death
D. All of the above 
Correct Answer: D
16. A, B and C are joint tenants with equal share each , for a residential house property worth Rs 85 
lakh . B is a relative of A. In Case of A’s death, his right in the property 
A. Will devolve on A’s heir
B. Will devolve on A’s nominees
C. Will devolve on B and C
D. Will devolve on B only
Correct Answer: C
17. According to Hindu Succession Act legal heirs are defined as
A. Class I
B. Class II
C. Agnates and cognates
D. All of the above 
Correct Answer: D
18. Sneha wants partition of his father-in-law's HUF to claim her share and her husband's share out of 
the HUF's assets. In principle, Dr. Mishra is not keen for the same and wants to know whether his 
wife can legally demand partition of his father's HUF as she is also one of the members in the same?
A. With prior permission from IT department
B. No
C. Yes
D. Data is insufficient
Correct Answer: B
19. Which of the following is false?
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 73
1. two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood when they are descended from a 
common ancestor, by the same wife
2. two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood when they are descended from a 
common ancestress but by different husbands.
3. one person is said to be an "agnate" of another if the two are related by blood or adoption wholly 
through males
4. Two persons are said to be related to each other by half-blood when they are descended from a 
common ancestor, by the same wife
A. Only 1
B. Only 2
C. Only 3
D. Only 4
Correct Answer: D
20. Which of the following is included in class I heir of the Hindu succession Act
A. Son
B. son's daughter's son
C. daughter of a pre-deceased daughter
D. son's daughter's daughter
Correct Answer: A
21. What conditions must be followed by the testator while preparing the will under Muslim law in 
India? Select the False option.
A. A will must be in respect of property capable of being transferred and which exists at the time of 
the testator’s death.
B. Only one-third the estate may be bequeathed by will, subject to certain conditions and exceptions 
as prescribed by Shia law and Sunni law.
C. Only two-third the estate may be bequeathed by will, subject to certain conditions and 
exceptions as prescribed by Shia law and Sunni law.
D. bequest of up to one-third of property to an heir will require consent of the other heirs after the
testator's death.
Correct Answer: C
22. What are the primary sources of Muslim Law in India?
I. The Quran
II. the Sunna
III. Ijma and Qiyas
A. Only I
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 74
B. Only I, II & III
C. I, II & III
D. Only I & III
Correct Answer: C
23. Who can make a will?
A. Anyone who is of sound mind and has attained the legal age of majority can dispose of their 
property by a will.
B. A minor can also make a will, if he has an estate passed to him.
C. Both A & B
D. Anybody above 15 years of age
Correct Answer: A
24. What is the difference between bequest and inheritance?
A. Inheritance is the passing of the title to an estate upon death & a bequest is the act of leaving a 
thing under a will.
B. Inheritance is the act of leaving a thing under a will & Bequest is the passing of the title to an 
estate.
C. Both Inheritance & Bequest are same.
D. None of these
Correct Answer: A
25. Mrs. Namrata is facing some serious health conditions but is capable of understanding the mode 
of disposing her property & making a rational choice of who should inherit the property. Which of the 
following is true?
A. The will made by Mrs. Namrata will be void since she is facing serious health conditions.
B. The will made Mrs. Namrata will be valid.
C. The above data is insufficient
D. None of these
Correct Answer: B
26. Mr Ram, the testator bequeaths a property to Mr. Anil on 31st March 2019. Unfortunately, Mr Anil 
dies in a car accident on 1st May 2019. What would be the effect on the legacy?
A. The legacy lapses and forms part of the residue of the testator’s property.
B. The legacy would be passed to the legal heirs of Mr. Anil.
C. Testator cannot make any changes.
D. Both B & C
Correct Answer: B
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 75
27. Jatin bequeaths the sum of Rs. 50,000, and also a villa in Goa, to Ankit, with the bequest of the 
villa on the condition to that Ankit will have to reside there. Which of the following is correct in this 
situation?
I. Ankit may accept the bequest of money and refuse to accept the bequest of the villa.
II. Ankit needs to accepts the condition, or else both the bequests would be cancelled.
A. Only I
B. The above data is insufficient
C. Only II
D. Both I & II are correct
Correct Answer: A
28.A bequeaths to B, Rs. 5,000 being part of a debt due to him from B. He also bequeaths to C Rs. 
10,000 to be paid out of his bank accounts, which are further bequeathed to X. Select the correct 
Option.
A. The legacy to B is specific & the legacy to C is demonstrative
B. The legacy to B is demonstrative & the legacy to C is specific
C. The legacy to B & C are both Specific
D. The legacy to B & C are both Demonstrative
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: where specified property is given to the legatee, the legacy is specific; where the legacy 
is directed to be paid out of specified property, it is demonstrative”.
29. Amit bequeaths his house to Rahul on the condition that Rahul will pay for the education of her 
surviving children. Rahul refuses to perform this obligation; this would result in 
I. Rahul will still receive the House.
II. Rahul will not receive the House.
A. Option I is correct.
B. Option II is correct.
Correct Answer: B
30. Mr. Raj aged 58 years has a wife named Mrs. Radhika, aged 55 years live in a joint family. Mr. 
Raj passed away due to a heart attack. He had prepared no will. How will the property devolve in case
- Mr Raj & Mrs Radhika are not Parsis.
A. If the intestate has left a widow and lineal descendants, then one-third goes to the widow and 
balance two-thirds to the lineal descendants.
B. A widow & lineal descendants will get the equal share.
C. If the intestate has left a widow and lineal descendants, then Two-third goes to the widow and 
balance one-thirds to the lineal descendants.
D. Widow & lineal descendants both will get nothing, since Mr Raj died intestate.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 76
Correct Answer: A
31. Which of the following is True in case an individual has died intestate & is not Parsi –
A. If the intestate has left a widow and lineal descendants, then one-third goes to the widow and 
balance two-thirds to the lineal descendants.
B. If the intestate is survived by the widow and kindred, but no lineal descendants, then one-half goes 
to the widow and the balance one-half to the kindred.
C. If there are no lineal descendants or kindred then, that the property goes entirely to the surviving 
husband or wife.
D. All of the above 
Correct Answer: D
32. A soldier handwrites a will. Such a will would be termed as will.
A. Void
B. Contingent
C. Holographic
D. Sham
Correct Answer: C
33. Which of the following is/are true in respect of WILL?
1. A single will, made jointly by a husband and wife, where each may make a disposition of his or her 
respective properties is a joint will.
2. Conditional or contingent wills become enforceable only on the happening of a particular event.
3. When two or more persons make a will, whereby they bequeath their properties to each other, it is 
known, as a reciprocal will.
4. An executor is a person appointed by court to administer testator's property and to carry into effect 
the provision of the will
A. 1,2 & 3 correct
B. 2 & 4 correct
C. All of the above
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A
34. Which of the following statement/s are true?
1. A Joint will is a testamentary instrument whereby two persons agree to make a Joint Will.
2. Where a Will is executed in duplicate the testator keeping one and depositing the other with some 
other person it is called a Duplicate Will.
3. A Mutual 'Will' is one of the two testamentary papers made respectively by two persons each giving 
the other similar rights in his property and being in fact identical so far as they can be, for the purpose 
of carrying out the intention of the testators
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 77
4. A Will executed in two copies are called, as duplicate will.
A. All of the above
B. 1,2 & 3
C. 2 & 4
D. 1 & 4
Correct Answer: B
35. Select the correct statement/s
1. Onerous Will imposes an obligation on the legatee that he gets nothing until he accepts it completely
2. Two simultaneous will which are related to each other are known as duplicate will
3. Will is mutual when two testators confer on each other reciprocal benefits as by either of them 
constituting the other his legatee
4. Heir can demand operation of will during the lifetime testator
A. Only 1
B. Only 2
C. 1 & 3
D. 1 & 4
Correct Answer: C
36. The rights and obligations of the deceased person gets transferred to the living person whom the 
dead person or the law on his behalf, has appointed to represent him in the world of living is
A. Succession
B. Transfer of estate
C. Will
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A
37. Which of the following is true?
1. Any changes in a will can be made by writing a codicil
2. Court appoints an administrator to take over estate of a deceased in absence of will
3. The person who has responsibility to care for the children of a deceased is called guardian
4. In case two wills are found, then last WILL will be considered
A. Only 1
B. Only 2
C. Only 3
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 78
38. A person or firm that holds or administers property or assets for the benefit of a third party is 
known as .
A. Beneficiary
B. Prosecutor
C. Trustee
D. Executor
Correct Answer: C
39. A person to whom a Trusts assets / income is intended for is known as .
A. Beneficiary
B. Legal heir
C. Nominee
D. Trustee
Correct Answer: A
40. A person who creates the trust is known as .
A. Settlor
B. Trustee
C. Executor
D. Testator
Correct Answer: A
41. Advantages of a trust are
1. To provide sufficient income for minor children or family members
2. To provide financial assistance to family members
3. To avoid probate
4. Cost-efficient since no cost is charged to establish a trust
A. Only 1
B. 1,2 & 3
C. None of the above
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: B
42. As per the IT act 1961, an individual or a firm appointed as a trustee has obligation to pay tax in 
the capacity of
A. Creator of trust
B. A representative assessee
C. A prosecutor
D. An individual only
Correct Answer: B
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 79
43. The person designated as the recipient of income from a trust is the
A. Grantor
B. Trustee
C. Remainder beneficiary
D. Beneficiary 
Correct Answer: D
44. Which of the following statement/s are true?
1. A trust created by an individual during lifetime, typically as a revocable trust is called living trust
2. Probate is the court-supervised process of proving a will and distributing property under the will or 
distributing property in accordance with the law in the absence of a will.
3. The property remaining in a descendant’s estate after payment of the estate's debts, taxes, and 
expenses and after all specific gifts of property and sums of money have been distributed as directed 
by the will is called the residuary estate.
4. Settlor is also known as arbitrator in estate planning
A. 1, 2, & 3 correct
B. 1, & 3 correct
C. 2, & 4 correct
D. 4 only correct
Correct Answer: A
45. Which of the following statements are true?
A. There can be only one grantor to the trust
B. A Living Trust is subject to Public scrutiny
C. The trust cannot be revoked by the creator during his lifetime
D. Trustees are appointed for a Trust, whereas Witnesses are appointed for a Will 
Correct Answer: D
46. Attestation of the will must be in presence of the testator.
A. True
B. False
Correct Answer: A
47. Recently in an unfortunate event, one of the Kunal’s brother died in road accident at the age of 32. 
He was a bachelor & he died intestate. Kunal’s parents were living with his deceased brother. Apart 
from Kunal there are three other siblings of the deceased. Kunal wants to know the applicable order 
of priority as per Hindu Succession Act for the disposition of his deceased brother’s property.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 80
A. Both parents will get the priority over all siblings, including Kunal himself.
B. All siblings of Kunal will get the priority over their parents.
C. Kunal’s mother will get priority over her husband & sons.
D. All of them will have equal right over the property of the deceased.
Correct Answer: C
48. Thirukatti wants to know that in case he dies intestate, who among his following relatives would 
not get preference while his property is being devolved.
A. Mother
B. Sister
C. Daughter
D. Wife
Correct Answer: B
49. Kartik wants to know according to which Act his father’s estate would be distributed in case he 
dies intestate.
A. Hindu Succession Act 1956, under which people belonging to Sikh, Hindu, Buddhist, Jain 
religion are covered.
B. Hindu Succession Act 1956, under which people belonging to Sikh, Hindu, Parsi & Jain religion 
are covered.
C. Hindu Succession Act 1925, under which people belonging to Sikh, Hindu, Buddhist, Jain religion 
are covered.
D. Hindu Succession Act 1925, under which people belonging to Sikh, Hindu, Parsi, Christian, Jews 
& Jain religion are covered.
Correct Answer: A
50. Soumya wants to adopt a child & part with some of her properties in favour of the child. She wants 
to plan her Estate as she will remain a spinster throughout her life. But she is afraid that after her 
death, her brother may challenge such transfer. You would advise her
A. not to do any Estate Planning
B. to prepare a WILL
C. to create a registered living trust where the child would be the beneficiary.
D. to prepare a power of Attorney in favour of her father to manage her property for the benefit of the 
child.
Correct Answer: C
51. Under the IT Act, any amount received by as a Gift in an financial year will be taxableA. If the Aggregate of the gifts received from an unrelated person exceeds Rs. 50,000 in cash or 
by way of credit to an individual or a HUF.
B. If the Aggregate of the gifts received from an unrelated person exceeds Rs. 50,000 in cash only to 
an individual or a HUF.
C. If the Aggregate of the gifts received from an unrelated person exceeds Rs. 50,000 in cash or by 
way of credit to an individual.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 81
D. If the Aggregate of the gifts received from an unrelated person exceeds Rs. 50,000 in cash or by 
way of credit to a HUF.
Correct Answer: A
52. Dhananjay wants to gift Rs. 5 Lac (in cash) to his son vijay to buy a house. Vijay wants to know 
how this receipt will be treated in his hands from Income Tax perspective.
A. No tax will be paid by Vijay as it is gifted to him to buy a house.
B. No tax to be paid by Vijay as gift in cash from a father to son is tax-free.
C. Either receipt will be taxable in the hands of Vijay as its received in cash.
D. Either receipt will be taxable in the hands of Vijay as its more than Rs. 50,000.
Correct Answer: B
53. Anil & Radha wants to donate Rs. 2,00,000 p.a. for the education of poor children of their area 
but for this purpose they do not want to hand over this amount to any person or organization. Anil 
wants to have your opinion regarding setup of proper entity for this arrangement. You advice to beA. Anil should set an irrevocable private charitable trust & devolve the necessary asset in the 
trust.
B. Anil should create his personal HUF & devolve the necessary asset in the trust.
C. Anil should make an amendment in the partnership deed to his firm & create a provision for the 
same in new deed.
D. Anil should hold these funds in his personal account & manage the same in his personal capacity.
Correct Answer: A
54. You have advised Ishita to do estate planning. According to you what should be the most preferred 
way for her estate planning.
A. She should devolve all of her personal HUF.
B. She should prepare a Will naming her children as the sole beneficiaries in the same.
C. She should prepare a Will naming her children as the sole beneficiaries as well as designate one or 
more guardians with their prior consent.
D. She should transfer all of her existing properties in the name of her children & nominate her both 
children equally in all her legal documents.
Correct Answer: C
55. Which of the following is true about a Revocable Trust?
A. A trust that may not ring-fence assets and the assets of the trust may be attached in recovery of the 
settlor’s of debts under law.
B. The settlor cedes the ownership and control over trust property and on his death will not form part 
of his estate.
C. assets transferred to a trust by a settlor would continue to be treated as the settlor’s assets, under 
income tax law.
D. Both A & C 
Correct Answer: D
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 82
ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST 
MCQ QUESTIONS – (GLOBAL)
1. You are collecting information & examining circumstances related to Estate planning for your client 
who shall be retiring in next 15 years. Which of the following is not essential at this stage?
A. Accounting for all assets, fixed & financial, & charges/lien over them.
B. Information of all financial liabilities & encumbrances, their gross & outstanding values, & whether 
covered by way of insurance.
C. Value of retirement fund & whether client wishes to gift or bequeath a part of that.
D. Details of division of the estate among the heirs & other dependents.
Correct Answer: C
2. Susan, Jessica, Violet & Helen want to purchase a holiday home together. The friends have decided 
to purchase a holiday home together. The friends have known each other since their university days 
& want to get a place that will allow them to share holidays together with their families. The four have 
located a house they want to purchase, & they are trying to decide the best form of ownership. The 
total cost for the house is Rs. 40,00,000. Susan plans to invest Rs. 10,00,000. Jessica will invest Rs. 
10,00,000. Violet plans to use the house more than the others & will invest Rs. 12,50,000. Helen plans 
to invest the remaining Rs. 7,50,000. After seeking professional legal & financial advice, the friends 
have decided to purchase the holiday home & title it as tenants in common. Which of the following 
statements is most likely correct?
A. If Susan dies, the remaining owners have automatic right to the decedent’s share of the property.
B. If Susan dies, the remaining owners have no automatic right to the decedent’s share of the property.
C. Susan will own 25%, Jessica will own 25%, Violet will own 25%, and Helen will own 25%.
D. Susan will own 25%, Jessica will own 25%, Violet will own 18.75%, and Helen will own 31.25%.
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: This arrangement does not come with rights of survivorship. As such, when one owner 
dies, his or her portion of the property passes to the decedent’s estate & will be disturbed according 
to the terms of the will. If Susan dies, the remaining owners have no automatic right to the decedent’s 
share of the property.
3. Yash turned 18 years of age this year. His mother, Mrs. Kavya gifted him a car which she bought a 
year ago. The car has been retitled to Yash’s name & he now has full ownership of the car.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 83
A. Since, the car has been retitled to Yash’s name now, Yash has Future interest in the car.
B. Since yash has outright ownership, he has a present interest in the car.
C. Since the car has been retitled to Yash’s name, he has neither present interest nor Future Interest
in the car.
D. Yash will have present interest in the car after Mrs. Kavya passes away.
Explanation: Yash has a present interest in the car, since present interest refers to legal or beneficial 
ownership that allows a person to use the property/asset immediately.
4. What makes a gift “complete”?
A. Relinquishing all control over the over the property being transferred.
B. Relinquishing the control over the income from the income-producing asset for a period of time 
but not the control over the asset.
C. Both A & B can be possible.
D. None of these.
Correct Answer: A
5. Which one of the following is not true about Community Property?
A. It is all property acquired & held as part of the matrimonial estate (including debts).
B. While living, each spouse may act, & the action will be considered to be a part of community 
property. But the debt incurred by one partner will not be owned by other.
C. Community property is all property, unless otherwise declared as being separate, that is acquired 
after marriage.
D. None of these.
Correct Answer: B
6. A is a document (except in cases of valid oral) that specifies how the 
property owner wants his or her estate to be distributed at death.
A. Probate
B. Contract
Will
Correct Answer: C
7. Will is also known as 
A. Trust
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 84
B. Testatory Document
C. Probate
D. Succession Certificate
Correct Answer: B
8. The person whose will is being prepared is called the 
A. Executor
B. Settlor
C. Testator
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: C
9. Which legal document lays out the fate of an individual’s property after his death.
A. Registry
B. Will
C. PoA
D. Submission
Correct Answer: B
10. Which of the following is true about gross estate?
A. It is everything a person owns.
B. any amount subject to taxation on transfer or distribution (which may or may not include
everything).
C. Both A & B.
D. None of these.
Correct Answer: A
11. Mr. Ram, Anil & Kush managed a garment business together, named ABC Garments Ltd. They 
wanted to plan about the future funding in case of any eventuality (death of any business owner among 
them). Since Their families are also not competent to manage the business. There are several ways to 
provide the funding, but one of the common methods is through use of one or more life insurance 
policies. Which of the following statements is most likely correct?
A. In a buy-sell cross purchase method, the business pays the insurance premiums.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 85
B. In a buy-sell entity purchase method, the buy-sell agreement is between Business owner A & 
business owner B.
C. In a buy-sell entity purchase method, the business pays the Insurance premiums.
D. In a buy-sell cross purchase method, the business receives the insurance proceeds.
Correct Answer: C
12. Identify which of the following include in some estate planning objectives of married couples as 
well as to the unmarried ones?
A. Plan for potential incapacity
B. Minimize taxes
C. Manage Assets
D. None of these
E. All of the Above
Correct Answer: E
13. As a financial planner, in which of the following cases would you think that the client’s
heirs/beneficiaries need protection, & if so from whom?
a. In a situation, when an elderly person who is a beneficiary, is mentally incompetent or nearly so.
b. In a situation, where a minor who is likely to overspend inherited assets; has creditors, even siblings 
& former spouses.
A. Only (a)
B. Only (b)
C. Both (a) & (b)
D. None of these
Correct Answer: C
14. In which of the following, forced heirship be a potential problem for surviving spouses?
A. In territories with succession mandatory rules, the surviving spouse may be required to share 
estate funds with the children.
B. In territories with succession mandatory rules, the surviving spouse may not be required to share 
estate funds with the children.
C. No, in general forced heirship is not a potential problem for surviving, since estate planning may 
give them a equitable share.
D. None of the following fits in the situation.
Correct Answer: A
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 86
15. As a Financial Planner, you explain your client the importance of Succession Planning & list out 
some of the points to consider in succession planning & they are 
I. The successor; family member, business partner, other
II. Succession type; partial or full succession, Timeframe
III. Key personnel changes, skill retention strategies & Restrictions
IV. Legal consideration; buy-sell agreement, reference to a will
V. Risk management & Communication strategy
VI. Financial considerations; retirement income, sale prices, tax implications
A. Only I & II
B. I, II, IV & VI
C. All of the Above
D. Only VI
Correct Answer: C
16. One identified potential problem when HNWI’s children inherit a large amount of property is
called affluenza. What is affluenza and how can it be addressed?
A. It refers to false sense of entitlement.
B. It is a situation in which HNWI’s children like to acquire even more amount of money.
C. It is a positive aspect therefore, it doesn’t need to be addressed.
D. None of the Above
Correct Answer: A
17. Buy-sell Agreements comprises ofsome consistent elements. Which of the following do you think 
need to be included?
I. The price that will be paid for the business.
II. The circumstances that allow the share of the business to be sold, such as retirement, death, 
disability, or leaving the business
III. Who can buy the departing owner’s share of the business?
A. Only II
B. Only I
C. C Only I & II
D. I, II & III
Correct Answer: D
18. A cross-purchase agreement is a document that allows a company's partners or 
other shareholders to purchase the interest or shares of a partner who dies, becomes incapacitated 
or retires.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 87
A. True
B. False
Correct Answer: A
19. When the current environment is not especially conducive to selling the business, but that situation 
is anticipated to improve in the near future, what can surviving family members do to continue 
business operations for a period of time?
A. If the business cannot be sold, the family should have plans to suspend business operations or 
perhaps hire someone (or a firm) to manage the business.
B. Handle the business by themselves only to save the managing costs.
C. Regardless of the business organization structure, the family members must sell the business as
early as possible.
D. None of these.
Correct Answer: A
20. Your client Mr. Girish informs you that he has dependent children & is worried about his survival 
since he is the only parent. As a financial planner, which one of the following is not an appropriate 
option that you will suggest Mr. Girish?
A. Sufficient Funds to provide for living expenses
B. A guardian/administrator to manage the money to oversee the funds.
C. Someone to care for and guide the children as they grow to majority and independence.
D. Keep the funds in the name of child’s aunt since he is close to him & later tell her to pass the 
same to his child after majority.
Correct Answer: D
21. What is an estate planning?
A. An intentional method of legally protecting your assets & determining the distribution of 
your belongings on death.
B. An intentional legal process to plan the layout of an estate property.
C. The plan devised to design a new home (the estate).
D. The plan developed by a judge after a person’s death to determine which beneficiaries of the estate 
receive which assets.
Correct Answer: A
22. How does the probate estate differ from the gross estate. Which of the following is not appropriate 
to the context?
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 88
A. The gross estate is not owned by the decedent.
B. The probate estate includes only those assets that pass-through probate. This means assets
distributed according to a will or by the rules of intestacy.
C. The probate estate will often be smaller, sometimes quite a bit smaller, than the gross estate.
D. None of these.
Correct Answer: A
23. How does a trust divide property ownership?
A. Legal Ownership.
B. Beneficial Ownership.
C. Both (A) & (B).
D. None of these.
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: A trust will divide property into two categories: legal ownership and beneficial 
ownership. Legal ownership is vested in the trustee who is required to administer the trust assets 
(corpus), on behalf of the grantor, for the benefit of the beneficiary, who has beneficial ownership. As 
previously described, beneficiaries who must wait to receive the trust corpus are said to have a future 
interest, while those who can demand and receive current income are said to have a present interest.
24. Which of the following is not true about Grantor Trust?
A. A Grantor Trust is one in which the grantor (i.e., the individual creating and supplying trust assets) 
retains some degree of control over the trust.
B. A Grantor Trust is one in which the trust creator gives up all right, title, and interest in the 
trust corpus.
C. In a grantor Trust, The Grantor may be a trustee and may also be the beneficiary.
D. Grantor Trust is taxed differently than that of Non- Grantor Trust.
Correct Answer: B
25. What is the function of a special needs trust and, where allowed, how may it be used?
A. A special needs trust, as the name implies, is a vehicle to hold cash or other assets that will be used 
to pay for necessary care, housing and other expenses, and provides spending money for the 
beneficiary.
B. The financial planner and family should use care in establishing the trust (or other) vehicle to 
ensure it is done in such a way as to receive all potential tax and other benefits and contains no 
provisions that may stand in the way of accomplishing its purpose.
C. Only A is correct
D. Both A & B are correct
Correct Answer: D
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 89
26. As a Financial Planner, which of the following must not be included in the checklist while 
reviewing a client’s willA. No changes in the residuary clause since it cannot be altered.
B. Cancellation of debts by a will provision is desired.
C. Review of will by an attorney has not occurred in the past 12 months.
D. Change in the amounts bequeathed to one or more beneficiaries is desired.
Correct Answer: A
27. How would you help a client to work through steps that will be part of an estate plan?
a) Create an inventory of what is owned and what is owed
b) Develop a contingency plan
c) Provide for children and dependents
d) Protect assets
e) Document wishes
f) Appoint fiduciaries/legal representatives
A. Only a, b & c
B. Only d & f
C. All of the above
D. Only e & f
Correct Answer: C
28. Deep would like to know how the property would devolve if a person dies intestate & also the 
importance of Estate Planning. According to you, which of the following is not appropriate in Estate 
distribution when a person dies intestate?
A. A Succession Certificate is applicable when there is no valid will.
B. Legal Heirs will apply to the civil court for grant of a Succession Certificate.
C. Law of Inheritance is application in Estate distribution.
D. Legal Heirs get estate rights on the basis of probate.
Correct Answer: D
29. Radhika, In case of her life contingency, is apprehensive about managing the affairs of her 
children. You advise her to set up a common Minor Beneficiary Trust for - Sush & Sushmita (aged 8 
& 10 years respectively). You put forth the argument in favour as:
A. Such a Trust shall protect assets transferred & shall manage them as per guidelines issued to 
the trustee until either or both of her children reach a specified age to be defined by Radhika.
B. Such a Trust shall protect & manage assets for her children only until they individually reach 
majority i.e., 18 years of age.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 90
C. Such a Trust shall not take further resources/assets/inheritances once the benefits have been 
transferred to it & the guidelines specified by Radhika for their use.
D. Such a Trust shall strictly prevent early distribution of assets before both Sush & Sushmita attain 
majority i.e., 18 years of age.
30. What are four basic coverages of a will?
A. Specifying how the individual wants the estate to be distributed at death & Naming an executor.
B. Naming a guardian/administrator for young (minor) children.
C. Revoking any previous versions of a will.
D. All of the Above.
Correct Answer: D
31. Which of the following is true about a non- grantor trust?
A. It is a term used to describe an arrangement where the donor of the assets gives up all the control.
B. With this type of trust, the donor gives up their right to revoke, amend, or terminate the trust.
C. A trust established under this is a taxable entity, which means a separate income tax return needs 
to be filed on behalf of the trust.
D. All of the Above
Correct Answer: D
32. Probate is the orderly process of estate distribution according to a valid will or applicable statute 
(e.g., rules of intestacy). It is handled through a probate court (which may or may not hold that title, 
depending on the territory). Probate has some positives. Which is of the following is least likely a 
positive regarding probate?
A. The probate process is structured according to relevant laws and applicable rules. This helps to 
keep things moving forward in the most effective, efficient manner.
B. Probate ensures fair distribution of assets according to the valid will and/or applicable statutes.
C. Probate is not expensive.
D. Probate is fair and orderly. The probate court oversees the process, which provides boundaries and 
structure.
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Probate can be expensive. All the court costs, legal fees, assessors, accountants, the 
personal representative, and related fees can cost a lot of money. This is a downside or negative to 
probate.
33. Who normally pays taxes related to giving or receiving a gift?
A. The Donor or gift-giver pays the taxes.
B. Recipients, if any taxes are due.
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 91
C. Both A & B.
D. None of these
Correct Answer: C
34. If an individual wants to reduce estate-related liabilities by giving an inter vivos gift, is there any 
possibility the gift may be recalled or brought back into the estate?
A. No there is no possibility, the gift may be recalled or brought back into the estate.
B. Yes, many territories have a lookback period for when the gift giver dies within a certain 
period of years following the transfer.
C. Depends upon the age of an individual.
D. None of these are the appropriate options.
Correct Answer: B
35. What is a unified tax and how may it be applied to estate planning?
A. The tax applies to the value of the estate at death and to certain transfers or gifts made during the 
individual’s lifetime.
B. In a unified system, the value of lifetime gifts will be deducted from any estate tax exemption.
C. It may be possible to give lifetime gifts with enough value that there is no estate tax 
exemption/exclusion left, and the entire taxable estate actually will be taxed.
D. All of the Above.
Correct Answer: D
36. Three main options exist that may circumvent forced heirship distribution schemes. Which one 
from these options is excluded?
A. Life Time Transfers.
B. Create a Trust.
C. Establish a foreign company to own property.
D. Develop a plan.
Correct Answer: D
37. What is usufruct & how may it apply to estate planning? Select the option which is not appropriate 
to this context.
A. Usufruct technically refers to the ability of a person to use the property of another person, without 
changing the character of the property.
B. Usufruct can allow a surviving spouse to live in the family home, use community property assets, 
and the like.
C. The rights normally do not terminate at the remarriage / death as well.
D. Only A & B
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 92
Correct Answer: C
38. What categories of family members may be considered to be primary heirs in a forced heirship 
scheme?
A. Spouse, Children of the decedent normally will be considered as primary heirs.
A. parents, grandparents, siblings, will be considered as primary heirs.
B. Both A & B can be considered to be primary heirs.
C. None of these.
Correct Answer: A
39. Probate can be a positive process used to effectively administer a decedent’s estate. However, it 
also can have some negatives associated with it. What are some of the negative aspects of probate?
A. Probate can be Expensive.
B. It can be time-consuming.
C. . Probate records generally are considered public information.
D. All of the Above 
Correct Answer: D
40.What options may HNWI and heirs use to protect their privacy as part of estate distribution?
A. HNWI may find it reasonable to have assets flow into a trust and name a reliable, often
professional, trustee.
B. they may use foreign (e.g., offshore) corporations to hold assets, or perhaps make use of domestic 
corporate (or other) entities that provide a degree of security and privacy.
C. Both A & B
D. Only A, since Option B is not appropriate to the context.
Correct Answer: C
41. One of your client Mr Sudhir, enquires to you about the intrafamily loan, you tell Sudhir that the 
following option is not true about the intrafamily loan.
A. With an intrafamily loan, parents can provide a financial resource to their children for a specific 
use, or create a trust for their benefit.
B. The rates used for intrafamily loans are typically not more attractive than what may be 
available commercially.
C. The rates used for intrafamily loans are typically more attractive than what may be available 
commercially.
D. They’re also a good way to transfer wealth with a minimum of tax consequences for you or your 
heirs.
Correct Answer: B
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 93
42. What is not the core element of a medical workup for mild cognitive impairment (MCI)?
A. Laboratory tests (perhaps including brain imaging)
B. In-office neurological examination
C. Thorough medical history
D. Input from a stranger who claims to be the well-wisher.
Correct Answer: D
43. Arrange the following stages through which cognitive impairment can pass.
I. Moderate impairment
II. Severe impairment
III. No impairment
IV. Mild impairment
V. Questionable impairment
A. I, II, III, IV & V.
B. III, V, IV, I & II
C. III, V, IV, II & I
D. I, III, IV, II & V
Correct Answer: B
44. What are some of the advance directives (legal documents) that can be used to prepare for the
possibility of incapacity?
A. Living will
B. Revocable living trust
C. Durable or enduring power of attorney (POA) & medical POA
D. All of the Above 
Correct Answer: D
45. What are some key symptoms of MCI. Which one of the following cannot be counted as MCI
Symptom?
A. Forgetting things more often.
B. Showing correct judgement.
C. Having trouble finding the way around familiar environments.
D. Forgetting important events such as appointments or social engagements.
Correct Answer: B
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 94
46. As a financial planner, what should you not do if you recognize that your client is experiencing 
MCI?
A. When a client experiences mild or full-scale dementia, it will change your relationship with 
them—both legally and professionally.
B. If you do not identify suspected incapacity to appropriate individuals (e.g., family, 
supervisors, related professionals), you do not become legally liable for your actions.
C. If you do not identify suspected incapacity to appropriate individuals (e.g., family, supervisors, 
related professionals), you may become legally liable for your actions.
D. None of these.
Correct Answer: B
47.Why is a regular POA not a good choice when a person becomes incapacitated?
 A normal power of attorney (POA) ceases to function when the principal becomes 
incapacitated. This defeats the purpose of having one in the event of incapacity. A better choice 
is a durable power or springing power.
State the Following isA. The above Statement is Correct
B. The above Statement is False, since A normal Will ceases to function not PoA
C. The above Statement is False, since A PoA never ceases to function.
Correct Answer: A
48. Since you explained your client that, Within the area of estate planning, the emphasis is on 
developing strategies that help the client achieve end-of-life goals. What are six estate planning 
concerns a financial planner should be ready to address? Which is not an appropriate option from the 
following?
A. Excess of Liquidity
B. Improper disposition of assets
C. Inadequate income or capital
D. Asset values destabilized and not maximized
E. Excessive taxes and transfer/distribution costs
F. Special needs
Correct Answer: A
49. The primary emphasis of financial planning is to develop strategies that help clients achieve life 
goals. Within the area of estate planning, the emphasis is on developing strategies that help the client 
achieve end-of-life goals. Wanting assets to remain in the family often is a common goal. The same 
is true for parents wanting to help children, especially in a financial way. Gifts are sometimes used
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST
FINANCIAL PLANNING ACADEMY 95
provide for children or grandchildren. When a gift is made, whether it goes to a family or nonfamily 
beneficiary, it will be subject to gift and perhaps inheritance rules in the territory. Another method of 
making an intrafamily transfer is through use of a loan. Each territory has its own rules for this, but 
we can identify some commonalities. Which of the following statements regarding intrafamily loans 
is most likely true?
A. A loan fits into a category that may create a taxable event.
B. An intrafamily loan cannot become a gift.
C. An advantage of an intrafamily loan is that the parent cannot simply state that a business actually 
valued at Rs.1 million will have an intrafamily loan value of Rs.100,000.
D. To be a loan, a financial transfer must have a legally recognized agreement, a stated rate of 
interest (which, in some cases in certain territories, may be 0%), and a repayment period 
with minimum required payment amounts.
Correct Answer: D
50. What are some decisions that should not be made immediately following death of a spouse?
I. Selling the house or other property.
II. Giving away the cash or other assets. (includes children).
III. not to make any major financial, legal, or lifestyle change for a period of time (e.g., at least six
months to one year).
A. Only I & II
B. Only III
C. I, II & III
D. Only I
Correct Answer: C
51.What are two reasons an heir might want to disclaim an inheritance?
A. When a person inherits an asset, often they also inherit any debt associated with that asset.
B. A second reason used to disclaim an inheritance is inconvenience.
C. Debt is not a reason; an heir might want to disclaim an inheritance.
D. Only A & B 
Correct Answer: D
RISK & ESTATE PLANNING SPECIALIST